Sustainability Report 2018   MESSAGE FROM THE DIRECTOR OF SUSTAINABILITY  Dear Stakeholder, Global megatrends, such as climate change, scarcity of resources, population growth, acceleration of urbanisation, changes in global economic power and technological advances, are changing the way that organisations, industries and society interact. Corticeira Amorim is no exception. In this ever-changing world, our choices and actions must increasingly be aligned with the actual capacities of Planet Earth, our common home, and the absolute necessity to promote global sustainable and inclusive development, eradicating the abysmal asymmetries that currently exist. At Corticeira Amorim we have always assumed a ﬁrm commitment to developing resourceeﬃcient products and solutions, produced in a sustainable manner and based on a sustainable raw material – cork. But we always want to go further. There are research, development and innovation projects that allow us to oﬀer a portfolio of products and solutions that achieve their functions in an irreproachable way, oﬀering incomparable advantages: they reduce the carbon footprint of the ﬁnal product, save energy or water, clean the environment, improve indoor air quality, and foster well-being and comfort. We therefore believe that our eﬀorts contribute to the Agenda 2030 and to the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (SDG). One of the key highlights of 2018 was the conﬁrmation of the sustainability credentials of the Neutrocork stopper, a latest generation cork stopper, which guarantees excellent quality with a signiﬁcant positive impact on the environment. And also WISE, the ﬁrst generation of Amorim-branded ﬂooring, that is a totally PVC-free, a carbon-negative product that incorporates cork and recycled materials. Over the past year, following an unprecedented stakeholders consultation process, we reviewed our sustainable development strategy and identiﬁed priority targets aligned with the SDGs. We underscored our contribution to integrating the values of ecosystems and biodiversity through the ongoing Forestry Intervention Project that over the coming years will foster, the planting of 50 thousand hectares of cork oak forest, with greater density and productivity than the traditional montado (cork oak forest); and to protect labour rights and promote safe and secure workplaces we set the objective to reduce the number of work-related accidents by 2020.  102  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .   This is a one-way journey. Overcoming challenges, innovating, exploring new ways of achieving more with less, inﬂuencing our value chain by setting an example, promoting the well-being of communities, create value in harmony with nature, make our work fascinating and rewarding. This is the work of a vast team – almost 4,500 employees all over the world – who invest their skills and enthusiasm in this mission. We would like to express our sincere gratitude to everyone. Also, a word of thanks is due to all our stakeholders for their collaboration and trust during 2018.  Cordially, Cristina Rios de Amorim Board Member and Director of Sustainability  SUSTAINABILIT Y REP O RT —  103   104  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .   1  ABOUT THE SUSTAINABILITY REPORT Corticeira Amorim has regularly published a sustainability report since 2006 – an unprecedented practice in the cork sector – promoting transparency, improving practices and fostering the adoption of the principles of sustainability both in its value chain and among its principal stakeholders. In 2017, we once again began to produce an annual sustainability report, included in the Consolidated Annual Report, thereby increasing the dissemination of this information to a wider number of stakeholders.  Key indicators from previous years are included, where possible, appropriate and relevant, to provide stakeholders with a perspective of the company’s development.  This current report, generically entitled the 2018 Sustainability Report, details the economic, social and environmental performance of the Corticeira Amorim in 2018 (perimeter indicated below). It has been drawn up in accordance with the latest GRI guidelines – GRI Standards 2016 for the core level and meets the legal requirements introduced by Portugal’s Decree-Law no. 89/2017 of July 28, being, under article 508-G of the Commercial Companies Code, a Consolidated Non-Financial Statement of Corticeira Amorim, SGPS, S.A..  In 2018, Corticeira Amorim implemented a stakeholder consultation process, which made it possible to identify the sustainability issues that stakeholders consider to be relevant in the framework of the Organisation’s activities.  The content of this report is complemented by publically accessible information contained in the Group’s Consolidated Management Report, the Corporate Governance Report and on the company website – www.amorim.com.  Combining the importance that various sustainability themes have for stakeholders and for Corticeira Amorim, a matrix was built illustrating the materiality of the various themes of the social, environmental and economic pillars, which served as the basis for the selection of information to be considered in this report.  Materiality Matrix – Corticeira Amorim High  Level of importance of the topic for Corticeira Amorim´s stakeholders  Promotion of the "Montado", its Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services  Ethics and Anti-Corruption Materials Management  Product Environmental Impact  Sustainable Supplier Management Client Privacy  Economic Performance  Research, Development and Innovation  Energy Eﬃciency and Climate Change  Compliance Waste and Eﬄuents Management  Health and Safety at Work Circular Economy  Water Management and Use  Product Quality and Responsibility  Training and Development  Employment and Labour Relations Diversity and Equal Opportunities Human Rights  Impact on Local Community  Low  High  Level of importance of the topic for Corticeira Amorim SUSTAINABILIT Y REP ORT —  105   The process showed that the most signiﬁcant topics for Corticeira Amorim and its stakeholders are: Promotion of the Montado, its Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services; Economic Performance; Research, Development and Innovation; Energy Eﬃciency and Climate Change; Health and Safety at Work; Circular Economy; Product Environmental Impact (including the topic of Product Quality and Responsibility). In view of its importance for the Organisation, the topic of Training and Development was also considered to be relevant for the purposes of this report. The criterion adopted to deﬁne the universe of companies covered by this report was to include all units that generate signiﬁcant impacts in regard to the areas referred to above. The scope of the report therefore does not include all the companies in the Corticeira Amorim group, largely due to the diﬃculty of implementing sustainability information systems in smaller companies. A plan for its gradual inclusion is underway. The companies covered include 86% of the Corticeira Amorim group’s industrial units and corresponded to 74% of its employees at the end of 2018. The methodologies used to calculate indicators, used in addition to the GRI Standards Guidelines 2016, are explained in chapter 7. Methodological Notes. Whenever the reported data does not refer to all the companies covered, the area covered considered is indicated. Similarly, whenever the reported data are derived from estimates, the basis on which these estimates are calculated is presented. Validation of the sustainability information included in this report was conducted by Ernst & Young Audit & Associados, SROC, S.A.. This document is available at https://www.amorim.com/en/sustainability/sustainability-reports/. Clariﬁcations can be requested from Corticeira Amorim using the email address: natural. choice@corticeira.amorim.com.  106  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .   2  CORTICEIRA AMORIM 2.1. O RG ANISATIONAL PROFILE 2.1.1. Identification Corticeira Amorim, SGPS, S.A. is a holding company with its registered oﬃce in Mozelos, Santa Maria da Feira. The shares that represent its share capital currently amount to €133 million and are listed on Euronext Lisbon. 2.1.2. Operational Structure Corticeira Amorim’s operations are organised into ﬁve Business Units (BUs). Corticeira Amorim adopts a management model based on a strategicoperational holding concept, where the BU are coordinated by Corticeira Amorim’s Executive Board. Each BU has its own Board of Directors, composed of non-executive members and executive members, which has the power to decide on all matters that are considered to be relevant. Each BU also has an Executive Board, which is composed of highly qualiﬁed, independent executives, who have suitable technical and professional skills to manage the respective business activities and the speciﬁc challenges associated to current and potential future activities. In the BU, executive management is the exclusive responsibility of independent professional managers. In other words, it is the CEO of the BU, rather than the Chairman of the Board of Directors who is responsible for executive management. In the case of the Cork Stoppers BU, given the complexity of the business, there are two independent professional Joint CEOs.  Composite Cork BU: focuses on the production of granulated cork, agglomerates and cork composites. The natural properties of cork, enhanced by combination with other materials, result in the development of cutting-edge solutions for a wide range of business sectors including construction, footwear, aerospace, railways, electricity transformers and interior design, among others; Insulation Cork BU: is dedicated to the production of insulation materials with excellent technical performance standards that are rigorously 100% natural. The unique characteristics of expanded cork agglomerate ensure a high level of thermal, acoustic and anti-vibration insulation – as well as practically unlimited durability – making it a material of choice for sustainable construction projects. Because of its tactile appeal, it is also being increasingly used in interior design .  The use of the balanced scorecard method by Corticeira Amorim and its BUs enhances the strategic alignment of the whole organisation. It is the responsibility of Corticeira Amorim’s Board of Directors to approve the objectives and strategic initiatives that (i) apply to the whole organisation, (ii) that are speciﬁc to Corticeira Amorim and (iii) of each BU in strict collaboration with the respective Executive Boards. 2.1.3. Main Products and Services Corticeira Amorim is continually deepening its knowledge of cork as a raw material, through research, development and innovation of a vast portfolio of sustainable products and applications that anticipate market trends and exceed the expectations of some of the world’s most demanding industries – such as wines and spirits, aerospace, construction, and interior design. Highlights include: Cork Stoppers BU: world leader in the production and supply of cork stoppers with an annual production of 5,5 billion units. Its extensive portfolio of natural cork stoppers (for wine, sparkling wine and spirits) and its own distribution network place it in an unparalleled position to supply the ideal cork stopper for every wine segment and in any part of the world; Floor and Wall Coverings BU: world leader in the production and distribution of cork ﬂooring and wall coverings. In line with sustainability and nature-inspired values, the Floor and Wall Coverings BU produces high quality and sustainable ﬂooring, thereby ensuring better quality of life, while preserving the environment. The use of a multi-layer structure, which combines the natural and exclusive properties of cork with state-of-the-art technology, has made it possible to develop superior ﬂoors, which oﬀer unique beneﬁts, such as greater acoustic and thermal insulation, greater walking comfort and superior indoor air quality;  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  107   2.1.4. Par ticipation in Associations The companies of the Corticeira Amorim group are members of the governing bodies, and participate actively in the discussions of several Portuguese and international associations and organisations in areas of interest to its activities and the sustainable development of the countries where it operates. They include: Organisation  Aim Corticeira Amorim’s Representative Cork sector business association that represents, promotes, disseminates and researches the Portuguese cork industry. http://www.apcor.pt  Vice-President of the Management Board and Chairman of the General Meeting’s Board  Business association that is a member of the world network of the WBCSD – World Business Council for Sustainable Development, the largest international organisation working in the field of sustainable development, with more than 200 associated companies in different countries and 68 independent organisations across five continents, which jointly represent over 20,000 companies and an international network of partnerships. https://www.bcsdportugal.org/  Vice-President of the Management Board  A body that supports the competitiveness and technological advancement of forest-based industries with the aim of protecting forests and guaranteeing their future without neglecting ecological, social and economic issues. http://www.aiff.pt/  Secretary of the General Meeting’s Board and Member of the Management Board  A non-profit organisation whose purpose is to contribute to the production and dissemination of knowledge in the area of waste. It encourages action to enhance cooperation between entities operating in the waste sector by promoting and supporting the activities and projects of its associates that contribute to achieving the association’s goals. http://www.smartwasteportugal.com/pt/  Member of the Management Board  A body that brings together companies, municipalities, research and development centres, business associations and other entities that believe in sustainability as a rallying banner for innovation and competitiveness. http://www.centrohabitat.net/pt  Member of the Management Board  Platform for all those involved in the area of research, technological development and innovation of the Spanish wine industry. http://www.ptvino.com  Member of the Technical Section  The University of Minho initiative that brings together more than 80 researchers from diverse fields of knowledge, with the goal of finding solutions to the complex societal challenges associated with sustainability. http://ib-s.uminho.pt/  Member of the Strategy Board  2.2. PEOPLE AND CULT URE  This shared culture is based on:  Aware of its responsibility as a critical player in its area of activity, Corticeira Amorim fully assumes its leadership role, fostering the ambition to continuously develop new cork solutions that combine exceptional technical performance, a premium factor and unique sustainability credentials and that add value to the market when compared with more conventional solutions.  Mission: To add value to cork in a competitive, diﬀerentiating and innovative manner, in perfect harmony with Nature.  It is a source of pride to work with a natural raw material as versatile as the thousands of applications that cork gives rise to and, Corticeira Amorim believes, that it will continue to generate. However, it is, in fact, the company’s employees all around the world who support Corticeira Amorim’s growth and innovation strategy. This is why the company advocates a people management policy that promotes ambition and challenge, commitment and demand, cooperation and working in partnership. Developing a work environment where transparent communication, internal equity and diversity of every kind are imperatives is the fundamental goal underpinning the company’s policies and practices as they relate to people and work environments. Corticeira Amorim belives that to go far, a group of women and men from diﬀerent countries with diﬀerent roles should all converge in a shared culture, in which identiﬁcation with its products and its business is something that everyone can share.  108  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP ORT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MORIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .  Values: Pride – We take pride in the tradition of our business, in our Company history and in the knowledge that we have accumulated in the many years of work of diﬀerent generations. We are proud to work with a raw material that comes from the earth that is sustainable, has an identity, and combines tradition, modernity and innovation. Ambition – We take pleasure in what we do, we drive ourselves to do more and better, attracting new customers, new markets and new applications for cork. Initiative – We ﬁnd solutions for commitments and challenges, responding quickly, eﬀectively and positively to diﬀerent circumstances and contexts, always focused on the development of the business and the industry. Sobriety – We celebrate victories and commemorate successes internally, favouring discretion in our relationship with the outside world, never forgetting that we must always learn more and continuously do better. Attitude – We remain loyal to the company through good and bad times, via our eﬀort, commitment and availability, giving our best and always respecting Colleagues, Customers, Suppliers, Shareholders and other stakeholders relevant to the sustainability of Corticeira Amorim.   2.3. PRINCI PLE S AND P OLICIE S Matters relating to the governance, risk and internal control of Corticeira Amorim are subject to wide and regular reﬂection within the organisation. Reﬂecting the professionalism and the ethics of its leaders and managers – as well as their culture – some aspects related to these issues are not formally set down in writing or publicly available.  2.3.2. Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct Corticeira Amorim has formalised a Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct to guide the professional behaviour of all its employees. The Code is the subject of regular reﬂexion and revision, most recently in 2017. The Code currently covers 12 areas: × Professional use of the company’s assets;  While being convinced that the risks to which the Company’s activity is subject are fully covered and the interests of its stakeholders safeguarded, the Company is aware of the increasing emphasis and scrutiny given to such matters and has begun a detailed analysis of its current practices. This analysis is underway and aims, wherever possible and appropriate, to give formal expression to these matters and to disseminate them.  × Privacy and conﬁdentiality;  The policies adopted by Corticeira Amorim reﬂect a set of commitments by the Company in the areas of ethics and economic, environmental and social responsibility. Together, they embody the responsibilities assumed by the diﬀerent companies within the framework of a management model that advocates responsible competitiveness. Full details can be found at https://www.amorim.com/en/sustainability/ integrated-management-system/policies-and-management-system/ and: https://www.amorim.com/en/for-investors/institutionalinformations/board-members/.  × Corruption/bribery;  2.3.1. Human Rights Defending and respecting human rights is a fundamental practice for Corticeira Amorim. No cases of discrimination have been identiﬁed in any of the group’s activities or operations, nor has any risk of child labour, forced or compulsory labour or restrictions on the freedom of association or freedom of unionisation been identiﬁed.  × Data protection;  The work with Corticeira Amorim’s chain of suppliers is carried out in accordance with institutional and legal structures. Working conditions in the supply chain satisfy the labour legislation in force in each region where Corticeira Amorim operates. Although no such risks have been identiﬁed in the company’s activities or in the supply chain, Corticeira Amorim’s aim is to continue adopting practices which distinguish it positively in terms of sustainable development and the safeguarding of human rights, promoting – by example and awareness-raising initiatives – these practices throughout the supply chain. Thus, Corticeira Amorim’s methodology for the qualiﬁcation and assessment of suppliers includes, among other means, the use of social responsibility indexes, as detailed in subchapter 2.4. Supply Chain, and at https:// www.amorim.com/en/sustainability/integrated-management-system/ policies-and-management-system.  × Rules governing the use of information technology; × Relations between employees; × Community;  × Customers and suppliers; × Communication with the exterior; × Corporate image; × Industrial property;  × Human rights/preventing harassment. 2.3.3. Corruption and Bribery The identiﬁcation and assessment of the risks of corruption and bribery in the markets where Corticeira Amorim operates is carried out jointly by the Executive Board and the BU’ management teams, taking into account the speciﬁc characteristics of each market and is complemented by internal control process audits that assess the conformity of processes and identify ineﬃciencies. Corticeira Amorim has deﬁned a procedure for communicating irregularities and it is incumbent on the company’s Statutory Audit Committee, a body composed entirely of independent members, to receive, in accordance with its operating regulations, any notice of irregularities (addressed to the Statutory Audit Committee and sent by post to the company’s registered oﬃce) communicated by shareholders, employees or other persons or entities, and to deal with them appropriately. After analysing the irregularities communicated, it is also the committee’s responsibility to suggest measures for preventing the occurrence of such irregularities. No irregularities were communicated in the 2018 ﬁnancial year. More information on this can be found in the Corporate Governance Report, chapter C. Internal Organisation, II. Communicating irregularities.  SUSTAINABILIT Y REP O RT —  109   2.3.4. Management Systems  29 Industrial units / distribution with FSC certiﬁcation in the chain of custody 5 Industrial units / distribution with certiﬁcation ISO 50001 4 Industrial units / distribution with certiﬁcation ISO 14001 1 Industrial unit with certiﬁcation OHSAS ISO 18001 Corticeira Amorim’s management system certiﬁcations are considered fundamental for ensuring the eﬀective management of environmental and social issues and are geared towards achieving the company’s strategic goals. The BUs are certiﬁed in diﬀerent management systems appropriate to safeguarding against and mitigating the non-ﬁnancial risks arising from their activities. In 2018 this practice was reinforced through the renewal of the certiﬁcations of diﬀerent management subsystems in the diﬀerent companies and the beginning of the process for implementation of new certiﬁcations: an industrial unit for ISO 50001 certiﬁcation; four industrial units for ISO 14001 certiﬁcation; ﬁve industrial units for ISO 45001 certiﬁcation. Furher information is available in the table in chapter 6 of the Consolidated Management Report, Approaching Sustainability.  Cork Manu Stop p fa Prac ctur er t ic in g e  Qua  Forest Produc ts n Chai -of-Cu sto d  y  nd ha a lt y He Safet  t li y  od  S  af  et  vi ro  Fo  nm  en  t  Integrated Management System  En  y  Energy  110  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP ORT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MORIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .  2.3.5. Voluntary Commitments Charter of Principles of the Business Council for Sustainable Development (BCSD Portugal)  BCSD Portugal is part of the world network of WBCSD – World Business Council for Sustainable Development. In Portugal it is the umbrella organisation of more than 90 leading companies that are actively committed to ensuring a smooth transition to sustainability. Corticeira Amorim subscribed in November 2017 to the Charter of Principles which sets out the fundamental principles of sustainability that subscribing companies voluntarily adopt, seeking to absorb them into their value chain and sphere of inﬂuence. The Charter also encourages subscribers to go beyond compliance with legal norms by adopting recognized norms and practices, aligned with ethical, social, environmental and quality standards, in any context of the global economy. Like all subscribers to the Charter, Corticeira Amorim: × recognises the importance of sharing information about sustainability with its stakeholders, giving answers and clarifying any doubts or concerns in the area of sustainability, thus contributing towards stressing the importance and relevance of adopting sustainable practices; × considers the Charter to be an initiative that is applicable throughout the value chain and will seek to open a dialogue with its direct and relevant suppliers in order to encourage them to sign up to the Charter; × commits itself to the ambitions set out in the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals. The Charter can be consulted at: https://www.bcsdportugal.org/en/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/ Carta_Principios_BCSDPortugal_ENG.pdf Charter of Principles of the Porto Protocol The Porto Protocol is a new movement, founded in Porto by Adrian Bridge, president of The Fladgate Partnership group, which began with over 96 companies to share and discuss solutions to tackle climate change and minimise its impacts. For the global launch of the initiative, the Climate Change Leadership Porto Summit 2018 was held in Porto, attended by countless personalities, including Barack Obama, former president of the USA, Mohan Munasinghe, 2007 nobel peace prize winner and Irina Bokova, general director of UNESCO. The summit focused on the issue of climate change and solutions to mitigate this problem. The Porto Protocol and its Charter of Principles were also presented during the summit. This movement aims to create synergies between companies committed to ﬁghting climate change in the awareness that, by their example, they can inﬂuence other entities to support this cause. The members of the Porto Protocol undertake to pursue their activity on the basis of good environmental principles, and execute projects that improve the sustainability of their respective organisations. The Porto Protocol also foresees the development of partnerships among members, the possibility of disseminating ideas and providing access to new learning tools, reports and expertise produced by oﬃcial entities. For further information: https://climatechange-porto.com/portoprotocol/.   2.4. SU PPLY CHAIN  UN SD G S AND TARGE TS  29 Units with FSC certiﬁcation in the chain of custody  Decent Work and Economic Growth  Responsible Consumption and Production  Partnerships for the Goals  72% Purchases of cork in Portugal Main means of transport is maritime Reﬂecting the ethical, economic, environmental and social responsibility commitments referred to in subchapter 2.2. People and Culture, Corticeira Amorim gives preference, wherever possible, to suppliers who provide raw materials according to the best sustainability practices – in terms of both source of origin and manufacturing processes. Corticeira Amorim considers that raw material suppliers (mainly of cork) and transportation services assume dominant importance in its value chain, given their critical importance to the business and their relative weight in the company’s cost structure. Corticeira Amorim has a vertically integrated business model, encompassing all stages of production, from purchase of the raw material to commercialisation of a varied portfolio of cork products, sold to over 25,000 customers, wherein 93% of products are exported – to over 100 countries.  SDG 8.7 Take immediate and eﬀective measures to eradicate forced labour, end modern slavery and human traﬃcking and secure the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labour, including recruitment and use of child soldiers, and by 2025 end child labour in all its forms. SDG 8.8 Protect labour rights and promote safe and secure working environments for all workers, including migrant workers, in particular women migrants, and those in precarious employment. SDG 12.2 By 2030, achieve the sustainable management and eﬃcient use of natural resources. SDG 12.4 By 2020, achieve the environmentally sound management of chemicals and all wastes throughout their life cycle, in accordance with agreed international frameworks, and signiﬁcantly reduce their release to air, water and soil in order to minimise their adverse impacts on human health and the environment. SDG 12.5 By 2030, substantially reduce waste generation through prevention, reduction, recycling and reuse. SDG 12.8 By 2030, ensure that people everywhere have the relevant information and awareness for sustainable development and lifestyles in harmony with nature. SDG 17.16 Enhance the global partnership for sustainable development, complemented by multi-stakeholder partnerships that mobilize and share knowledge, expertise, technology and ﬁnancial resources, to support the achievement of the sustainable development goals in all countries, in particular developing countries.  Forests  Other ends  Raw-material Cork  Recycle  Other suppliers  Product end life  Inbound logistics  Product use  Company operations  Distribution  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  111   2.4.1. Procurement and Supply of Cork The integrated management of the business begins with the Raw Materials BU. Its mission is to guarantee the supply of all types of cork raw materials for the diﬀerent BUs and their respective market applications, wherein it is responsible for preparing, discussing and deciding on Corticeira Amorim’s multi-annual supply strategy. The Raw Materials BU assumes other important missions, and has a signiﬁcant impact on the accumulation of knowledge about cork oak forests (montado) and improvements in the quality of the cork produced. Among other activities, the BU promotes the forest certiﬁcation of cork producers, including Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) certiﬁcation. The BU is characterised by its strong research and forestry development policies. Introducing new cork production techniques by means of improved irrigation processes is one of its priority areas with the aim of increasing the quality and quantity of the cork produced to ensure the sustainability of the business. Further information is available in the subchapter 5.1.2. Forestry Intervention Project. Over recent years, this BU has adopted a policy of diversiﬁcation of its supply sources, in order to take proactive action in all regions of cork production (Mediterranean Basin, as shown below), being concentrated in Portugal (72%). These are also the areas where Corticeira Amorim’s operations are mainly located. Of the total number of employees identiﬁed in this report, 95% (more than 3 100 jobs) belong to units located in this geographic area, demonstrating the importance of the Company’s activity for the social and economic promotion of these areas, while preserving cork forests – one of the largest natural treasures of the Mediterranean Basin. Cork purchases (thousands of euros) : 2018  2017  2016  Portugal  189,673  197,785  162,015  North Africa  10,909  9,373  14,562  Other Origins  62,407  55,313  55,127  262,989  262,472  231,705  Total  Annual production of cork by country: S OU R CE : F AO, 2 0 1 0  PORTUGAL 100,000 TONS 49.6%  MOROCCO 11,686 TONS 5.8%  FRANCE 5,200 TONS 2.6%  ITALY 6,161 TONS 3.1%  SPAIN 61,504 TONS 30.5%  ALGERIA 9,915 TONS 4.9%  TUNISIA 6,962 TONS 3.5%  Traceability – Forest Stewardship Council (F SC ) Certification Cork oak forests occupy an estimated area of more than 2,2 million hectares in the Western Mediterranean Basin. Portugal has the largest area of cork forest in the world, which corresponds to about one third of the world’s total cork forests. About 126 000 hectares of this area have FSC certiﬁcation (FSC Portugal, 12/31/2017). In 2004, Corticeira Amorim became the ﬁrst company in the cork industry to receive the FSC chain of custody certiﬁcation. In anticipation of the needs of the wine industry – the customer for its main product – it also became the ﬁrst packaging company in the world to receive this certiﬁcation. Among other initiatives, Corticeira Amorim was responsible, between 2008 and 2015, for a free technical advice service for forest producers who are jointly responsible for more than 20 000 hectares of cork oak forest in Portugal. The advice was aimed at identifying and adopting best management practices and supporting biodiversity. The service was launched in October 2007, when Corticeira Amorim joined the European Commission’s Business and Biodiversity Initiative, through a protocol established in partnership with Portugal’s Institute for Nature Conservation and Forests (ICNF) and two NGOs – World Wildlife Fund (WWF) and Quercus – Associação Nacional de Conservação da Natureza (Quercus). As well as the technical advisory service for forest producers, the agreement was also aimed at encouraging forestry research and disseminating best management practices. Corticeira Amorim continues to focus on product development in accordance with FSC principles and aims to maintain FSC certiﬁcation, a well-known international standard. By the end of 2018, around 29 Corticeira Amorim (industrial and/or distribution) units had received chain of custody certiﬁcation in accordance with FSC regulations, providing the market with increased guarantees in terms of protection of biodiversity, workers’ rights, rights of indigenous peoples and areas of signiﬁcant environmental and cultural importance. 2.4.2. Procurement and Supply of Non- Cork Products To manage the purchase of all non-cork materials, services and contracts, including transportation, the company runs a Central Purchasing Department. Its mission is to manage the portfolio of suppliers professionally and from a global perspective to maximise the sustainable creation of value by Corticeira Amorim, seeking excellence in the goods and services acquired and in permanent harmony with the goals of Corticeira Amorim companies. In this context, Corticeira Amorim privileges the establishment of stable and lasting partnerships with suppliers and enjoys a high degree of loyalty among its main suppliers. During 2018, this Department supervised a global volume of purchases of more than €140 million, carried out in several countries, predominantly in Portugal Pre-qualification, Qualification and Evaluation of Suppliers The company has deﬁned a methodology for the pre-qualiﬁcation, qualiﬁcation and evaluation of suppliers, partly based on social responsibility (IRSoc) and environmental responsability indexes (IRAmb): suppliers are qualiﬁed to supply Corticeira Amorim in function of the quality of the good or services they supply, their delivery times and their social responsibility and environmental responsibility indices. Methodology for Evaluating the Social Responsibility Index (IRSoc) The IRSoc is calculated according to the percentage of requirements met by the supplier. If the supplier is certiﬁed in accordance with the NP 4469 standard, they will be given an IRSoc of 100%. For each requirement that the supplier does not undertake to comply with, 25% will be subtracted from their IRSoc.  112  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .   Methodology for Evaluating the Environmental Responsibility Index (IR Amb) The IRAmb is calculated according to the percentage of requirements met by the supplier. If the supplier is certiﬁed in accordance with the ISO 14001 standard, they will be given an IRAmb of 100%. For each requirement that the supplier does not undertake to comply with, 25% will be subtracted from their IRAmb. If a supplier is found not to meet one or more of the requirements to which they have committed, they will be given an IRSoc or IRAmb of zero. Further information on the requirements of these indices can be found at https://www.amorim.com/en/sustainability/integratedmanagement-system/policies-and-management-system/. A supplier audit programme is drawn up each year, based on a speciﬁc set of criteria, including the following: supplier performance in the previous year, criticality of the products / services provided or whether it is a new supplier, and including quality, environmental and social aspects. After each audit, the supplier’s performance is evaluated. When nonconformities are identiﬁed, a plan of action is requested and, in function of the criticality of the detected nonconformities, the companies of the Corticeira Amorim group can conduct follow-up audits to check implementation of the speciﬁed actions. There may also be a need to collaborate with the supplier to resolve nonconformities or ﬁnd alternatives to that supplier. During 2018, Corticeira Amorim did not substitute suppliers as a result of the pre-qualiﬁcation, qualiﬁcation and evaluation process of suppliers. 2.4.3. Transpor t The company runs a Department of Transportation within the Central Purchasing Department that is governed by values of commitment, credibility, integrity (ethics) and the pursuit of excellence. Its strategic goals include:  2018 Consumption outside the Organisation (GJ)  CO2 Emissions – Scope 3 (t CO2) (Portugal Scope)  (Portugal Scope)  Transport and upstream distribution  2017 Consumption outside the Organisation (GJ)  CO2 Emissions – Scope 3 (t CO2) (Portugal Scope)  (Portugal Scope)  444,101  32,916  364,681  27,022  3,820  283  3,199  237  Business travel  14,137  1,020  16,420  1,175  Employee transport  36,039  2,677  32,458  2,405  983,750  71,917  911,767  67,072  Waste generated in operations  Transport and downstream distribution  New actions have been undertaken to minimise this impact and ensure that it continues to be a positively diﬀerentiating factor of Corticeira Amorim’s international competitiveness, maximising, whenever possible, the maritime transport of goods rather than road transport, wherein the former is the main means of transport used by the company. The group also encourages projects aimed at maximising the amount of product transported per unit of packaging, with a view to rationalising transport ﬂows.  CASE STUDY  × positioning purchasing as a value generator for the organisation;  Maximisation of Product Packaging in the Cork Stoppers BU  × optimising the purchasing structure with a view to achieving goals common to the whole organisation;  Objective: Developed by Amorim Top Series, in order to reduce the amount of packaging material used; reduce, at source, the quantity of materials channelled towards waste / recycling; maximise the amount of product transported per packaging unit; optimise stocking space along the supply chain.  × diﬀerentiating its approach according to the category and nature of the process in question; × aligning the technological platform with management processing and information requirements. In recent years, the transport area has become a critical factor for the business in both economic and environmental terms. This is due, on one hand, to an increase in costs caused by fuel price rises, and, on the other, by the weight transport has in the consumption and emissions of upstream and downstream operations in the value chain. Upstream and Downstream Activities in the Value Chain Emissions generated in the value chain occur mainly during the transport of raw materials and products, which are primarily handled by external logistics service providers. Upstream and downstream transport and distribution accounts for 96% of scope 3 emissions ascertained. The values presented below consider the most important aspects of Corticeira Amorim’s value chain, for its activity in Portugal. In 2018, there was an increase in scope 3 emissions compared to 2017, as a result of an increase in business activity. Information on scope 1 and 2 emissions can be found in subchapter 5.2. Energy Eﬃciency and Climate Change.  Initiatives: Development of a pallet-size box which uses less cardboard, including the design of more ergonomic solutions for opening/use: × Identiﬁcation of a partner to produce it; × Testing the solutions along the supply chain to evaluate their robustness and rigidity; × Promotion of the idea with stakeholders; × Implementation. Results: This solution, already adopted by several clients and which is being evaluated and tested by others, enables the following: × Insert another 20% of product in each packaging / transport unit, thereby increasing the quantity of product transported in each shipment; × Increase the quantity of product that may be stocked in the same space; × Reduce the amount of packaging materials by 30%.  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  113   by aligning the diﬀerent management subsystems that promote eﬃciency, as shown here: https://www.amorim.com/en/sustainability/ integrated-management-system/policies-and-management-system/.  3  SUSTAINABILITY MANAGEMENT AND STRATEGY  Amorim is not only a world leader in the cork industry, it’s also an outstanding role model for companies everywhere, because of its high quality products and deep commitment to economic, social and environmental sustainability. PROF. MOHAN MUNA SING HE , NOBEL PE ACE PRIZE 2007  3.1. SU STAINABILI T Y MANAGE MENT STRUCT URE Corticeira Amorim reﬂects continually on its corporate governance in the light of Portuguese and international best practices, the developing circumstances of its business activities and the challenges to which it has to respond. As a result, it has implemented a set of measures that seek to strengthen internal control and oversight systems, increase transparency, encourage the participation of all stakeholders in the life of the company and ensure the sustained creation of value for stakeholders. Best corporate governance practices are a cornerstone of Corticeira Amorim’s sustainable development. The Corporate Governance Report sets out in detail the structure and practices of corporate governance, describing on the website https://www.amorim.com/en/sustainability/ management-of-corporate-sustainability/ the material considered relevant or complementary to this report, in particular: × consultation and involvement of stakeholders; × the organisational structure supporting corporate sustainability (CS) management. The integrated sustainability management system is based on Corticeira Amorim’s mission and values. It advocates: Interaction with stakeholders, especially consulting them regularly. This is considered fundamental for validating strategic options and for gauging expectations regarding the matters that stakeholders want Corticeira Amorim to monitor and communicate to them. Additional information about stakeholder consultation in 2018 can be found in subchapter 3.2. Engagement with Stakeholders. Strategy: The strategic alignment of the whole organisation is strengthened by the use of the balanced scorecard method. It falls to the Board of Directors to approve strategic goals, strategic initiatives and priority actions. The integration of processes with the strategic perspectives of the balanced scorecard strengthens sustainable development practices  114  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .  Operations: the teams responsible for implementing sustainable development practices at each BU, acting in accord with a structured programme called Natural Choice, implement the initiatives and actions required to meet deﬁned goals and regularly monitor performance. Support structure: the organisational structure facilitates the management and alignment of the sustainable development strategy and policies and practices that derive from it. The support area focuses on coordinating the activities of each BU and their respective functional areas with the Executive Commission responsible for their periodic monitoring and supervision, as set out in the diagram in chapter B. Corporate Boards and Committees of the Company Corporate Governance Report. António Rios de Amorim, CEO and Chairman of Corticeira Amorim oversees Sustainability.   Management and Strategy in Corticeira Amorim:  Executive Committee  Director of Sustainability Cristina Rios de Amorim Coordenator of Sustainability  Teams responsible for implementing sustainable development practices at each BU  Floor and Wall Coverings  Cork Stoppers  Raw Materials  Composite Cork  Insulation  3.2. E NG AGEMENT WITH STAKEHOLDERS Corticeira Amorim recognises all its stakeholders as fundamental to the continuation of its activities and to the success of the company. Corticeira Amorim considers that all its stakeholders fulﬁl important roles in validating its strategic options. The sustainable management of Corticeira Amorim takes into account their concerns and expectations in deciding what issues require monitoring and communicating. 3.2.1. Cor ticeira Amorim’s Stakeholders Corticeira Amorim’s stakeholders include all those persons or institutions that aﬀect and/or are aﬀected by the company’s activities, products or services and by its performance.  8 rs and  tne  1  hol Inve ders sto & rs  7  ent  2  Cli  NGD Com s & mu nit y  r iety Pa il Soc iv C  Share  yee  s  s  pp  5  lier  s  3  plo  Em  ia  6  Med Su  & ie ial tit O ﬃc t En men Govern  4  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  115   Report Shareholders' General Meeting Meetings with investors and analysts Periodic report of the evolution of the activity Report & Accounts Sustainability report Promote & Disclose Initiatives to protect the montado and the environment Environmental education / awareness actions Community involvement initiatives Support for initiatives / projects Collaborate Selection and evaluation of suppliers Satisfaction surveys Participation in fairs and industry events Awareness and technical support programs Innovate Collaboration protocols on R & D Publication of technical articles Involve Work groups Meetings and periodic contacts General and sectoral meetings Inform Information panels Procedures and policies Intranet Performance management systems Seminars and workshops Internal thematic and awareness raising actions Communicate Answering external requests Visits to the montado and Corticeira Amorim Web site Newsletter and press releases Information brochures  116  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .  Par tners & Civil Society  NGOs & Community  Media  Suppliers  Official and Government Entities  Employees  Clients  Shareholders and Investors  3.2.2. Main Means of Communication Corticeira Amorim seeks to manage engagement and communication with its stakeholders in the best way possible for understanding and responding to their concerns and expectations. To this end, the company uses a diﬀerentiated range of communication methods and channels, as summarised in the following table. The communications methods used are subject to regular review.   3.2.3. Consultation Corticeira Amorim has deﬁned a regular stakeholder consultation and engagement process that enables the company to identify the core sustainability issues to considered among future priorities and for designing a strategy for their respective engagement. The most recent process occurred in 2018. a) Procedures used and structure of the questionnaire Procedures used: Duration: the questionnaire was conducted from July to August 2018 by Pricewaterhousecoopers (PwC). Distribution: the stakeholders of the various BUs were sent an email by the various contact persons at Corticeira Amorim inviting them to complete the questionnaire provided on an online platform. Whenever asked to do so by Corticeira Amorim, PwC sent stakeholders an email to emphasise the request to complete the questionnaire. Types of questions: the questionnaire consisted of three groups of open and closed questions with the possibility of adding additional comments. The questionnaire was divided into three main sections: Sustainability vision: a question about whether Corticeira Amorim was considered to be an organisation with a clear vision of its economic, environmental and social responsibilities, with a ﬁeld to add explanatory examples. Sustainability performance: two questions: the ﬁrst, multiple choice, identiﬁed Corticeira Amorim’s importance and performance in sustainability themes, with a ﬁeld to add other relevant non-predeﬁned themes; the second, open-ended, was designed to identify opportunities for improvement in themes selected in the preceding questions that performed poorly. Sustainability report: ﬁve questions: the ﬁrst question aimed to identify whether the stakeholders had read the latest sustainability report; the second aimed to classify the information provided in the report overall; the third aimed to classify the sustainability report according to seven criteria; the fourth, open-ended, aimed to present suggestions for improvement for the sustainability report assessment criteria; and the ﬁfth, also open-ended, aimed to include new themes in the sustainability report that had not been referred to in previous iterations. b) Sample characterisation and response rate Throughout the 2009-2018 period, various stakeholder consultation processes were held, with a gradual increase in the size of the sample. In the 2018 process, which involved many respondents (74%), 137 stakeholders and relevant sustainability themes were identiﬁed under GRI guidelines and in line with AccountAbility’s AA1000 Stakeholder Engagement Standard (AA1000SES) criteria and the requirements of ISO 9001 and ISO 14001. c) Distribution of responses by stakeholder group  Employees 29%  Clients 24%  Oﬃcial and Government Entities 4% Partners & Civil Society 7% Suppliers 19%  Shareholders and Investors 8%  Media 6%  NGOs & Community 3%  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  117   d) Main conclusions of the consultation process Sustainability vision Most (89%) of Corticeira Amorim’s stakeholders felt the organisation had a clear vision of its economic, social and environmental responsibilities. Question posed to stakeholders: “Do you consider that Corticeira Amorim has a clear vision of its social, environmental and economical responsibilities?” Global Evolution 2009-2018 95%  97%  94%  95% 89%  5%  6%  3%  0%  0%  0%  2009  2011  2013  5%  9%  0%  2%  2015  2018  Strongly Agree & Agree Strongly Disagree & Disagree I do not agree, i do not disagree  Relevant themes TOP 5 2018 – Level of importance Promotion of the "Montado", its 4.7 Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services 4.6 Economic Performance  4.5 Ethics and Anti-Corruption  4.5 Materials Management  4.4 Waste and Eﬄuents Management  Question posed to stakeholders: “Considering the Corticeira Amorim’s business activity, classify the level of importance the various themes?” Within the scope of Corticeira Amorim’s activities, the ﬁve themes important to stakeholders include three themes from the environmental pillar and two themes from the economic pillar. On the themes of “Human Rights”, “Water Management and Use” and “Materials Management”, stakeholders awarded a signiﬁcantly higher level of importance compared to 2015. The most important theme identiﬁed by stakeholders was “Promotion of the montado, its Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services”. “Ethics and Anti-Corruption” is the third most important theme for stakeholders and the one that reveals the best perceived performance by respondents. “Economic Performance” is identiﬁed as the second most important theme and second best performing theme at Corticeira Amorim.  118  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .   Sustainability Performance Question posed to stakeholders: “Considering the Corticeira Amorim’s business activity, classify the level of performance the various themes?” “Human Rights” and “Employment and Labour Relations” show the most signiﬁcant improvements in performance as perceived by stakeholders compared with 2015. Declines were seen in perceived performance assessment with regard to the themes of “Promotion of the montado, its Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services” and “Impact on the Local Community”. To a general degree, for the stakeholders consulted, Corticeira Amorim has performed well in the ﬁve themes considered most important. There is an opportunity to improve the themes of “Human Rights” and “Employment and Labour Relations” that revealed lower perceived performance compared to the results as a whole. Level Importance Vs Level Performance  4.2  4.0  4.2  4.2  4.2  4.1  4.1  4.0  3.9  3.9 Impact on Local Community  4.3  Human Rights  4.3  4.0  Employment and Labour Relations  Client Privacy  4.3  4.1  Diversity and Equal Opportunities  Research, Development and Innovation  4.4  4.1  Training and Development  4.4  4.2  Product Quality and Responsibility  4.4  4.5  Water Management and Use  4.4  4.4  Circular Economy  4.4  4.3  Compliance  4.5  4.1  (economic, social and environmental)  4.5  4.4  Health and Safety at Work  4.6  4.5  Energy Eﬃciency and Climate Change  4.7  Product Environmental Impact  4.3  Waste and Eﬄuents Management  4.4  Materials Management  4.3  Ethics and Anti-Corruption  4.4  Economic Performance  4.2  Sustainable Supplier  4.7  Management (economic, environmental and social monitoring; local supplier purchase; transport)  4.5  Promotion of the "Montado", its Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services  4.3  Level Performance Level Importance  Sustainability Report Question posed to stakeholders: “Classify the information provided in the 2017 Sustainability Report.” Around 97% of the stakeholders who have read the Sustainability Report consider the information provided to be good or very good. There are no negative ratings from stakeholders. Only 3% are indiﬀerent to the information provided. In comparison with the stakeholder consultation process in 2015, there was a slight 1-percentage-point rise in the positive rating of the information provided in the Sustainability Report.  Classif y the information provided in the 2017 Sustainability Report 3% 0%  57% 10%  20%  30%  40% 40%  50%  60% Very Bad  70% Bad  80%  Not Good, Not Bad  90% Good  100% Very Good  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  119   3.3. SU STAINABLE DEVELOPMENT PRIORI TIE S  Strategy aligned with 12 of the 17 SDGs The strategic priorities for sustainable development identiﬁed by Corticeira Amorim comprise economic, environmental and social concerns that take into consideration the results of consulting stakeholders, benchmarking analysis, internal commitments and policies and alignment with the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Ambitions established by the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals Approved by 193 countries in September 2015, the 17 SDGs make up part of the 2030 sustainable development agenda of the United Nations. They are the result of governments and citizens all around the world working together to establish a new global model capable of ending poverty, providing prosperity and well-being for all, protecting the environment and combatting climate change. In 2018, Corticeira Amorim revised its sustainable development strategy based on materiality analysis, in order to foster alignment with stakeholders’ expectations and feedback. It also identiﬁed the SDGs that are most related to the material themes, and selected performance indicators and key targets for each relevant SDG. Twelve SDGs and 44 targets were identiﬁed as priorities for Corticeira Amorim’s sustainable development strategy.  Promote R&D and leverage economic performance  11•12•15 8•9 Research Development and Innovation  Promotion of the “Montado”, its Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services  7•11•13  8  Energy Eﬃciency and Climate Change  Economic Performance  4•5•8  6•7•13  Training and Development  Promote the environmental features of the product and the “Montado”  Product Environmentad Impact  3•8 Health and Safety at Work  8•12 Circular Economy  Promote people’s development, safety and well-being  Good Health and Well-Being  120  Quality Education  Gender Equality  Clean Water and Sanitation  Aﬀordable and Clean Energy  Decent Work and Economic Growth  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .  Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure  Sustainable Cities and Communities  Responsible Consumption and Production  Climate Action  Life on Land  Partnerships for the Goals   4  PROMOTE RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND INNOVATION AND LEVERAGE ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE  × Providing continuous training for employees in support of their professional and personal fulﬁlment; × Facilitating internal and external communications, establishing new channels for exchanging information and improving existing ones; × Permanently seeking to implement the best management and monitoring practices and identify opportunities for improvement. UN SD G S AND TARGE TS  Decent Work and Economic Growth  Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure  4.1. R E SEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND INNOVATION  €7.5 M€ average investment R & D + I/year 25 New patents (3 years) SDG 9 calls for the construction of resilient and sustainable infrastructures and promotes inclusive and sustainable industrialisation. It also recognizes the importance of Research, Development and Innovation to ﬁnd long-lasting solutions to major social, economic and environmental challenges. Cork is, by nature, such a formidable material that it might seem impossible to improve it. But that is precisely what Corticeira Amorim has done since its foundation – with a ﬁrm commitment to ensuring diﬀerentiation through quality and making a unique contribution, unparalleled in the industry, to the reinvention of an exceptional natural resource that responds to the main challenges of today’s society, beneﬁtting people, the planet and sustainable development. Research, development and innovation (R&D+I) is strategic to business development and value creation for all of Corticeira Amorim’s BUs. The company also has a decisive and autonomous transversal structure – Amorim Cork Research. Each BU also has its own R&D+I competences. More information is detailed in the Innovation, Research & Product Development chapter of the Consolidated Management Report for the ﬁnancial year 2018. The company’s R&D+I policy is guided by the following principles: × Developing new products and markets for cork; × Seeking out new technological solutions, in terms of both products and processes, in partnerships with customers, suppliers and other bodies; × Strengthening the reputation of its brands through the constant evolution of product ranges in response to new market and consumer trends;  SDG 8.2 Achieve higher levels of economic productivity through diversiﬁcation, technological upgrading and innovation, including through a focus on high-value added and labourintensive sectors. SGD 8.3 Promote development-oriented policies that support productive activities, decent job creation, entrepreneurship, creativity and innovation, and encourage the formalization and growth of micro-, small– and medium-sized enterprises, including through access to ﬁnancial services. SDG 9.4 By 2030, upgrade infrastructure and retroﬁt industries to make them sustainable, with increased resource-use eﬃciency and greater adoption of clean and environmentally sound technologies and industrial processes, with all countries taking action in accordance with their respective capabilities. SDG 9.5 Enhance scientiﬁc research, upgrade the technological capabilities of industrial sectors in all countries, in particular developing countries, including, by 2030, encouraging innovation and substantially increasing the number of research and development workers per 1 million people and public and private research and development spending. Corticeira Amorim’s strategic commitment to R & D + I takes the form of an average annual investment of around € 7,5 million and much a higher amount invested in state-of-the-art technology and exclusive production processes, for the development of new products and solutions and reinforcement of Corticeira Amorim’s position as a knowledge centre. In this context, 25 new patents have been registered over the last three years. 2018 Submission of patents  2017  2016  9  5  11  × Fostering a culture of innovation through an environment favourable to the creativity, critical spirit and initiative of employees, nurturing teamwork and mutual assistance; × Valuing innovative practices; × Establishing an environment that provides incentives for boldness, assuming risks and failures as an inherent part of the innovation processes;  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  121   122  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .   4.2. E CONOMIC PERFOR MANCE  €716.1 M distributed to stakeholders Corticeira Amorim began trading in the nineteenth century and over its life has become the world’s largest cork-processing company, currently generating turnover of more than € 763 million in more than 100 countries, through a network of dozens of subsidiaries. Cork is a 100% natural raw material and Corticeira Amorim has developed a varied portfolio of cork-based products, that are used by some of the world’s most technologically advanced and demanding industries, such as the wine and spirits industries, aerospace, construction, sports, interior design and fashion. The cork oak forest is of crucial importance to the economy and ecology of several Mediterranean countries. Portugal has 34% of the world’s total cork forests, corresponding to an area of 736 thousand hectares and 23% of Portugal’s forestry area. The cork oak is found mainly in Southern Portugal, with the Alentejo occupying a prominent place – with 84% of the total. Annual worldwide cork production is 201 thousands tons, and Portugal once again stands out as the world’s biggest cork producer, with 49.6% of the world total. Portuguese cork exports account for about 2% of Portuguese exports, 1.2% of total exports and a trade balance of €815.6 million, equivalent to a coverage rate of 578%. (Source: 2018/19 APCOR Cork yearbook).  UN SD G S AND TARGETS  Decent Work and Economic Growth  SDG 8.1 Sustain per capita economic growth in accordance with national circumstances and, in particular, at least 7 per cent gross domestic product growth per annum in the least developed countries.  In 2018, Corticeira Amorim generated net income of €766,9 million, with €716,1 million distributed to the various stakeholders, corresponding to a 12% increase over the income distributed in 2017.  Operating Costs  2016  643,798  2016  706,692  2017  66,111  2018  766,910  2018  2016 2017 2018  113,608 128,071 136,117  Capital Providers  2016 2017 2018  34,556 36,626 39,425  2016 2017 2018  38,560 24,397 16,525  2016 2017 2018  150 224 209  56,736  2017  Employees  Community  Economic Value Accumulated  400,188 451,264 523,777  State  Economic Value Generated  2016 2017 2018  50,856  (thousand euros)  In every country in which the group operates, Corticeira Amorim contributes to local social security regimes covering all its employees in accordance with the speciﬁc legislation in eﬀect. In 2018, this contribution rose to € 22,1 million, 10% higher than the amount in 2017. 2018 Local Social Security Regimes  2017  2016  22,056  19,996  17,830 (thousand euros)  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  123   5  PROMOTE THE ENVIRONMENTAL FEATURES OF THE PRODUCT AND THE MONTADO 5.1. P ROMOTION OF THE MONTAD O, ITS BIODIVERSI T Y AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICE S  €100/year per hectare – value of the ecosystem services of the montado 50 thousand hectares of planned new plantations (Forestry Intervention Project) The montado is a highly important national agricultural, forestry and pastoral system, both at the socioeconomic and environmental level. The pan-European conservation network Natura 2000 rates the montado as highly important for conserving biodiversity. This ecosystem is highly biodiverse, including threatened species such as the emblematic Iberian lynx and Iberian imperial eagle, and provides society with countless services, ranging from regulation of the climate and water cycles to protection against erosion and wildﬁres, carbon sequestration, cultural services such as open-air leisure activities, cork and ﬁrewood production, and cattle rearing. The production of cork on the estate (key to its economic viability) does not aﬀect the countless services provided by the ecosystem since the cork-extraction process – stripping – does not harm the tree. The cork oak lives for 200 years on average, during which it may be harvested between 15 to 18 times. The cork oak is the only oak species whose bark regenerates after extraction. The WWF’s Living Planet Report 2018 underlines the importance of nature to people and mentions that “all economic activity ultimately depends on services provided by nature, making it an immensely valuable component of a nation’s wealth.” The same report notes that the ecosystem services supplied by nature globally are worth around $125 trillion per year. Corticeira Amorim is conscious of its role in ensuring the viability of cork oak forests and considers that their defence/ preservation is a strategic priority. The company’s contribution to the maintenance, conservation and enhancement of the cork oak forest is based on the following guidelines:  124  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .  × Expand knowledge about the environmental impact of cork products and the ecosystem they support; × Promote cork solutions and the development of the cork oak forest as guarantors of the ecosystem; × Proactive discussion of policies and proposals for measures to protect the cork oak and conserve cork oak forests, as well as promoting the cork sector, the certiﬁcation of forest management systems and remuneration of the environmental beneﬁts of cork oak forests. UN SD G S AND TARGE TS  Sustainable Cities and Communities  Responsible Consumption and Production  Life on Land  SDG 11.4 Strengthen eﬀorts to protect and safeguard the world’s cultural and natural heritage. SDG 12.8 By 2030, ensure that people everywhere have the relevant information and awareness for sustainable development and lifestyles in harmony with nature. SDG 15.1 By 2020, ensure the conservation, restoration and sustainable use of terrestrial and inland freshwater ecosystems and their services, in particular forests, wetlands, mountains and drylands, in line with obligations under international agreements. SDG 15.2 By 2020, promote the implementation of sustainable management of all types of forests, halt deforestation, restore degraded forests and substantially increase aﬀorestation and reforestation globally. SDG 15.3 By 2030, combat desertiﬁcation, restore degraded land and soil, including land aﬀected by desertiﬁcation, drought and ﬂoods, and strive to achieve a land degradation-neutral world. SDG 15.5 Take urgent and signiﬁcant action to reduce the degradation of natural habitats, halt the loss of biodiversity and, by 2020, protect and prevent the extinction of threatened species. SDG 15.9 By 2020, integrate ecosystem and biodiversity values into national and local planning, development processes, poverty reduction strategies and accounts. SDG 15.a Mobilize and signiﬁcantly increase ﬁnancial resources from all sources to conserve and sustainably use biodiversity and ecosystems. SDG 15.b Mobilize signiﬁcant resources from all sources and at all levels to ﬁnance sustainable forest management and provide adequate incentives to developing countries to advance such management, including for conservation and reforestation.   5.1.1. Increasing knowledge relating to the impact of cork products and the ecosystem they make viable Corticeira Amorim was the ﬁrst company in the industry to promote the analysis of the environmental impact of its products, namely cork stoppers, comparing the life cycle of cork stoppers with those of aluminium screwcaps and plastic stoppers. The analysis concluded that cork stoppers are the most environmentally friendly. More information can be found at https://www.amorim.com/en/sustainability/integrated-management-system/management-approaches/. In 2018, a number of life cycle analysis and Environmental Product Declaration (EPD) studies were carried out in the various BUs, through which it has been possible to highlight the superior environmental performance of cork solutions, based on internationally recognised standards.  CASE STUDY Study on Neutrocork’s carbon footprint in the Cork Stoppers BU Objective: The Neutrocork stopper is recommended for wines with a certain complexity and is used by thousands of wine producers around the world. The recent study, conducted by PwC, aimed to conﬁrm that this stopper has a negative carbon footprint, thus reiterating the group’s commitment to protecting the environment. Initiatives: In this independent PwC study, a life cycle analysis (LCA) methodology was used, following the guidelines of the Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Protocol, developed by the World Business Council for Sustainable Development and the World Resources Institute. The Cradle to Gate methodology made it possible to calculate the carbon emissions of the Neutrocork stopper across the entire production process and distribution process to the UK. Results: The study concluded that the Neutrocork stopper has a negative carbon footprint of -342 kg of CO2 per ton of product, corresponding to -1.8 g of CO2 per cork stopper. When considering the carbon retention capacity of the cork oak forest associated with cork production, the result is even more impressive: a total of -73 342 kg CO2 per ton of product, or -392 g CO2 per cork stopper. This independent study conﬁrmed the environmental credentials of the Neutrocork stopper, a solution that, in addition to its technical excellence, highlights the value of cork as one of the world’s most exceptional natural and sustainable materials.  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  125   CASE STUDY Rigorous Quality Control in Amorim Isolamentos Objective: The Insulation Cork BU is dedicated to the production of acoustic and thermal insulation agglomerated cork, 100% natural and with a high technical performance. The goal is to recognize the superior quality and sustainability of its products in comparison with conventional products. With virtually unlimited durability, cork retains all its characteristics throughout the product’s lifetime, in addition to being 100% natural and fully recyclable. It is industrially produced without recourse to additives and requires reduced energy consumption. Initiatives: Subjection of processes and products to rigorous certiﬁcation processes. Results: The following certiﬁcations: × Quality control according to EN 13170 and consequent CE marking; × DAPHabitat System by Centrohabitat – Association of the Platform for Sustainable Construction – Environmental Product Declaration based on ISO 14025; × NATUREPLUS – International Association for Sustainable Construction and Accommodation (Germany) – certiﬁes the best products for sustainable construction; × ACERMI – Association Pour La Certiﬁcation des Matériaux Isolants (France) – certiﬁes speciﬁc materials used for insulation, evaluating their technical performance; × ICEA – Institute for Ethical and Environmental Certiﬁcation (Italy) – certiﬁcation of the environmental and ethical aspects of products; × R certiﬁcate from Positivlisten Arge kdR (Germany) – certiﬁes energy consumption throughout the product’s life cycle, depletion of resources and the emissions associated to the materials; × LQAI – Indoor Air Quality Laboratory (Portugal) – certiﬁes non-emissions of VOC, formaldehyde and other compounds related to the product; × PCS – Sustainable Construction Portal (Portugal) – product sustainability certiﬁcate; × Ecological Certiﬁcation – Japan Environment Association (Japan) – certiﬁes the environmental impact of products; × ISO 9001 Certiﬁcation; × Thermal conductivity certiﬁcation after 45 years of use, keeping characteristics intact.  126  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .   5.1.2. Forestry Intervention Project Corticeira Amorim has been working on a project aimed at ensuring the preservation and sustainable development of cork oak forests – the Forestry Intervention Project. Under the motto “take care of the present, build the future”, the main guidelines include improving the installation of irrigation systems, sequencing the cork oak genome, improving the cork oak species and combatting pests and diseases. The project was born out of an experimental plantation of cork oaks that Francisco de Almeida Garrett, owner of the Herdade do Conqueiro estate in Avis, Alentejo (Portugal), began irrigating a few years ago. The success of his experiment – the ﬁrst cork harvest for some trees was made after only eight years instead of the normal 20-25 years – motivated him to contact Corticeira Amorim. The company, aware of the importance of these results, immediately involved the University of Évora. In this context, the ﬁrst structured plantation of 50 hectares of cork oak trees was launched in 2017, which is innovative compared to other areas of cork forest, since it beneﬁts from an improved irrigation system. This system provides drip irrigation for new trees until the ﬁrst extraction of cork, at which point the cork tree returns to its normal growth pattern, with cork harvested at nine-year intervals. In the plan deﬁned for the Forestry Intervention Project, the goal is, with involvement and support of forest owners, to plant 50 thousand hectares of cork oak trees, with a higher density than current areas of cork forest, and thereby increase cork production by 30%.  CASE STUDY Improving the cork oak and crossbreeding diﬀerent species in the Raw Materials BU Objective: Select trees only by crossbreeding species naturally without any genetic manipulation. The goal is to produce trees that are better adapted to soil and climate conditions as well as to climate change to produce quality cork. Initiatives: × Mycorrhiza process – application of a fungus to the roots of cork oaks to increase their robustness and resistance; × Sequencing the cork oak genome – mapping the cork oak’s genetic code will make it possible to identify the genetic markers for cork quality and to develop other markers for identifying pest– and disease-resistant trees, enabling an ideal selection of cork oaks while retaining genetic variability; × Research focused on pest and disease control. Results: A combination of traps and volatile attractants (pheromones) will be in the ﬁnal phase of experimentation, which will allow the bio-rational control of Coraebus Undatus – the ﬂathead oak borer – reducing the number of aﬀected trees.  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  127   CASE STUDY Project LIFE+ SUBER in the Raw Materials BU Objective: To contribute to the better adaptation and resistance of cork oak forests to climate change, ensuring their conservation and the maintenance of the associated value chain. The programme also includes the objectives of combatting water stress, the growth of pests and the frequency of wildﬁres. Launched in 2014, the project was led by the Consorci Forestal de Catalunya in association, besides Amorim Florestal, with the Centre Tecnologic Forestal da Catalunya, Forestal Catalana and the Centro de la Propiedad Florestal de Catalunya. It was supported by the European Commission under the LIFE programme and was co-ﬁnanced by Amorim Florestal Mediterrâneo, the Diputació de Barcelona and the Institut Català del Suro. Initiatives: The project was developed in Catalonia and covered a total of 108 hectares of forest and associated control areas. A total of 28 measures were implemented grouped into diﬀerent categories:  × Dissemination measures: to convey the techniques and tools developed under the project to owners and managers of montado. Results: Through the Life+ SUBER project, innovative forestry management models were applied to improve the vitality and production of the cork oak forest, reducing the risk of wildﬁres. With measures such as selective pruning and on-site treatment of the waste residues from cork harvesting, there is a reduction in the density of small trees and maintenance of the large trees. It is thereby hoped that cork production will increase. These interventions also lessened forest vulnerability, attaining important improvements with regard to treetop ﬁres leading to high-density wildﬁres, in particular. Pest control measures were also applied, namely biorational control of Coraebus Undatus, contributing signiﬁcantly to knowledge of this insect. Finally, cork oak restoration measures were applied by setting up protective systems for endangered trees, creating the conditions in which they can naturally regenerate and increase forest vitality.  × Implementation measures: establishment of demonstrative pilot plantations with diﬀerent innovative forest management techniques, from irregular management with selective cleaning to planting of cork oaks, restoration of degraded areas and massive removal of Coraebus Undatus; × Continuation measures: to test the eﬀectiveness of measures used and propose changes to improve techniques; 5.1.3. Acquisition of the Herdade da Baliza estate In 2018, Corticeira Amorim acquired the Herdade da Baliza estate, a property in the Castelo Branco/Tagus International region covering a total of 2 866 hectares for €5,5 million. This acquisition marked the company’s ﬁrst step as a forest owner, a strategic operation aimed at implementing new cork oak forest management techniques and leading by example. 5.1.4. Location of Operations Corticeira Amorim’s activities are conducted in areas outside those classiﬁed by the Instituto da Conservação da Natureza e das Florestas (ICNF) as protected. There is therefore no signiﬁcant impact on biodiversity.  128  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .   5.2. E NERGY EFFICIENCY AND CLIMATE CHANGE  Positive carbon balance 65% of energy used from biomass 72 thousand tons of CO2 emissions avoided Global megatrends, such as climate change and resource scarcity, population growth, heightened urbanisation, changes in global economic power and technological advances are aﬀecting consumer and company decision-making all around the world. At Corticeira Amorim, we respond proactively to these trends, promoting the montado, adopting a business model based on the circular economy and developing high-added-value green products based on renewable and recyclable materials that facilitate the transition to a low-carbon economy. Corticeira Amorim’s contribution to the ﬁght against climate change therefore involves continual improvement of its energy performance and the implementation of production technologies and processes that ensure the optimisation of the amount of cork used throughout the industrial process. As one of the main promoters of the montado, it also contributes in this way to ﬁghting climate change as cork oak trees are major carbon sinks, since they use their roots, leaves, trunk and bark (cork) to store carbon during their lives, which may last over 200 years. Investing in cork recycling programmes globally is another important contribution, given that extending the life cycle of cork through recycling delays the release of emissions of carbon embedded in cork back into the atmosphere. In 2013, Corticeira Amorim established an environmental policy common to all its BUs and subsidiaries. In alignment with its principles and sustainable management practices, it made commitments to: × Guarantee compliance with all legal stipulations and other requirements agreed to by the organisation and applicable to all the environmental aspects of its activities, products and services; × Control signiﬁcant environmental impacts and contribute to preventing pollution:  To implement these commitments, the various Corticeira Amorim BUs have set up diﬀerent management systems and gained certiﬁcation under the various standards described in subchapter 2.3. Principles and Policies, namely ISO 14001 and ISO 50001, which, with regard to the whole reported perimeter, cover 23% of the industrial units (IUs), correspond to 56% of energy used and, amongst other things, foresee speciﬁc procedures and responsibilities in line with the respective standards, internal audits, executive monitoring and deﬁnition of objectives. The implementation of ISO 14001 in another four IUs and ISO 50001 in another one is currently ongoing, increasing the reach to 34% of the IUs. In addition, it is important to note the existence of an Energy Eﬃciency Forum, which two or three times per year invites energy managers from the diﬀerent BUs with a view to improving process performance and eﬃciency. In 2018, this forum was held for the 29th and 30th times, involving the participation of over 60 employees. UN SD G S AND TARGE TS  Aﬀordable and Clean Energy  Sustainable Cities and Communities  Climate Action  SDG 7.2 By 2030, increase substantially the share of renewable energy in the global energy mix. SDG 7.3 By 2030, double the global rate of improvement in energy eﬃciency. SDG 11.6 By 2030, reduce the adverse per capita environmental impact of cities, including by paying special attention to air quality and municipal and other waste management. SDG 13.2 Integrate climate change measures into national policies, strategies and planning. SDG 13.3 Improve education, awareness-raising and human and institutional capacity on climate change mitigation, adaptation, impact reduction and early warning.  × Act proactively to evaluate and take preventive measure appropriate to minimising the environmental impacts speciﬁc to each activity, applying, whenever viable, the best practices and technologies available. In 2017, it subscribed to the Charter of Principles of BCSD Portugal (a member of the World Business Council for Sustainable Development – WBCSD), while also making a commitment to: × Foster continual improvement of processes, products and services by identifying, monitoring and mitigating the environmental risks associated with its activities, aiming at reducing the negative impacts on the climate, air, water, soil, biodiversity, territory and communities; × Reduce natural resource use and waste generation, maximising process eﬃciency, re-use and recycling; × Foster environmental responsibility, use of innovative and clean technologies and stakeholder involvement with a view to adapting to global challenges.  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  129   5.2.1. Energy Corticeira Amorim’s energy consumption, measured in gigajoules (GJ) increased in 2018 compared to 2017, in line with the increase in the company’s activity and integration of three new industrial units within the perimeter of the sustainability report. This is the result of the work implemented to date to increase the material dimension of the reported information. The energy mix remained practically unchanged, but there was a slight increase in the proportion of electricity used. 1, 62 7, 2 02  Total  1, 460, 011 1, 374, 002  4 11  Gasoline (GJ)  236 33 2  5 ,6 28  Propane (GJ)  9 ,3 3 9 7,4 5 0  26 ,5 21  Diesel (GJ)  22,70 3 21,73 3  58,254  Natural Gas (GJ)  73 ,0 5 0 74,161  4 8 5 ,272  Electricity (GJ)  4 10 ,73 8 3 9 1,3 9 2  1, 051, 116  Biomass (GJ)  2018 2017 2016  943, 946 878, 934  0  400,000  800,000  1,200,000  5.2.2. Energy Intensity 2018 Energy Intensity (GJ/M€ sales)  2017  2016  2,160*  2,161  2,142  * includes increase in perimeter; maintaining the same perimeter: 2,069  There has been a reduction in energy intensity compared to the previous year, which is more noticeable if we exclude the perimeter eﬀect (-4%), the result of the implementation of a set of 84 operating/energy eﬃciency measures split between various areas, notably thermal energy (20 measures), compressed air (37 measures) and drives/motors (10 measures). Energy management system certiﬁcations – ISO 50001 – were renewed in the ﬁve plants in the Cork Stoppers BU used as an implementation pilot with certiﬁcation underway for another plant in the Composite Cork BU. The adoption of this standard compels the establishment of systems and processes to improve energy performance and energy use and consumption, namely focusing on the more eﬃcient use of the energy sources available while creating systematised work that is executed and adapted to other management systems underway. In total, €3.5 million was invested, resulting in an annual saving of over 212 thousand GJ.  130  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .  1,600,000   CASE STUDY Energy Eﬃciency and Operational Optimisation Measures in the Cork Stoppers BU Objective: To improve energy eﬃciency and operational optimisation, to ensure more regular operation of all equipment and to therefore obtain a substantial improvement in process costs. Initiatives: Forty-ﬁve operational and energy eﬃciency measures were applied. One of the main measures was the installation of a high/ medium voltage substation with the improved operation of all the equipment dependent on it for energy. This project is part of the Lamas hub of the Cork Stoppers BU and covers three plants which share a production line. Results: The project makes annual savings in operational costs of roughly 20%, while providing improvements to the quality of energy supplied.  5.2.3. Emissions  69,408 63,355 57,401 51,098  60,048  53,624  4,198  Electricity (t CO2)  4,135  3,734  Natural Gas (t CO2)  1,610  1,682  1,963  Diesel (t CO2)  470  589  24  355  Propane (t CO2)  17  2016 2017 2018  2  Gasoline (t CO2)  Total (t CO2) (Location Method)  Scope 1 and 2 emissions attained 69,408 t CO 2, recording an increase over the previous year. The reasons for this increase were essentially the variation in the perimeter, the increase in business activity and the increase in the weight of electricity in the energy mix. Regarding electricity, similar to the consideration included in the 2016/2017 Sustainability Report, in order to align with the recommendations of the Greenhouse Gas Protocol, developed by the World Business Council for Sustainable Development and the World Resources Institute, in the present report, indirect energy emissions (scope 2) were calculated using the location-based method and the market-based method. Indirect energy emissions using the market-based method are: 64,735 t CO2 (2017: 54,792 t CO2, 2016: 41,485 t CO2). Information on scope 3 emissions is available in subchapter 2.4.3. Transport .  SUSTAINABILIT Y REP ORT —  131   CASE STUDY  5.2.4. Carbon Intensity 2018 Carbon Intensity (t CO 2 / M€ sales)  2017  2016  92.1*  88.9  89.5  * includes increase in perimeter; maintaining the same perimeter: 87.5  In 2018, despite the reduction seen in energy intensity, there was an increase in carbon intensity that essentially resulted in the higher share of electricity in the energy mix. A key contributing factor to this situation was the integration of three additional industrial units within the perimeter, which are undergoing a process of adjustment and adaptation to the processes in practice in the other plants. In comparison, the carbon intensity of Corticeira Amorim’s activities saw a 2% reduction to 87,5 tons of CO2 per M€ of sales. The constant demand to implement production technologies and processes to ensure the optimisation of cork yield in the industrial cycle has led to a reduction in the availability of cork dust for energy purposes. This raises some challenges and drove investment in production systems to make it possible to produce the same amount of energy from less cork dust. In 2018, therefore, energy produced from biomass maintained its share of 65%, deemed CO2 neutral, of Corticeira Amorim’s energy mix (65% in 2017 and 64% in 2016) and achieved 72 thousand tons of avoided CO2 emissions, as a result of the operational/energy eﬃciency measures and the mix considered. Among the main initiatives in 2018, of note was the Composite Cork BU’s project to improve the eﬃciency of boilers.  Improved Boiler Eﬃciency – Burning and Heat Transfer (thermal ﬂuid) in the Composite Cork BU Objective: The lack of temperature stability in thermal ﬂuid and steam form at the industrial unit led to a considerable rise in gas use. The project’s aim was to improve the energy eﬃciency of the boilers, ensuring temperature stability, raising the number of operating days of the main thermal ﬂuid boiler and ensuring the delivery of superheated steam. These measures reduced natural gas use and minimised emissions of incompletely burned particles, improving the environmental impact of the boilers. Initiatives: Work on the thermal ﬂuid and steam boilers. Results: × Thermal ﬂuid temperature stability in the industrial unit; × Increase of 63% in main boiler monthly working days; × 10ºC lower set point temperature; × Lower cork dust use; × Over 100% higher steam delivery temperature; × Lower electricity use with savings of around 146 tons of CO2; × Lower compressed air use with savings of around 296 tons of CO2; × 50% lower cleaning frequency; × Lower use of natural gas.  132  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .   5.3. P RODUCT ENVIRON MENTAL IMPACT  A vast range of green products Population growth places unprecedented pressure on the world’s ﬁnite resources. The 2017 report, produced by United Nations Environment Programme’s International Resource Panel, shows that global materials use is accelerating – it has more than tripled since 1970 and may double again up to 2050 – and if resource use does not become more eﬃcient, the Sustainable Development Goals will not be attained. As a 100% natural, 100% renewable and 100% recyclable product, cork is an excellent alternative to reduce global dependence on non-renewable products and lower the carbon footprint of ﬁnal products. Corticeira Amorim plays a proactive role in enlarging cork’s already extensive applications, sustained by the material’s innate characteristics, which also stands out for its lightness, excellent insulation and consequent energy eﬃciency.  5.3.1. Water Management and Use Water is an important natural resource that is key to human survival and the functioning of many industries. Climate change aﬀects the availability of fresh water and therefore economic growth, putting pressure on the global water supply. The lack of access to drinking water is a universal problem that is everyone’s responsibility. Water is especially important for the Raw Materials, Cork Stoppers and Insulation Cork BUs, responsible for the withdrawal of 86% of all water used by Corticeira Amorim. Public network water accounts for around 8% of all water collected, most of which is sourced from groundwater (92%). In 2018, water use rose by 5%, essentially due to variation in the perimeter. If the perimeter had remained the same, and despite the growth in activity, the rise would have been less than 1%, reﬂecting Corticeira Amorim’s eﬀort to manage water use eﬃciently. Water withdrawal (m 3 ) by source 2018 Public network  2017  2016  Clean Water and Sanitation  Aﬀordable and Clean Energy  Climate Action  30,259  31,073  465,673  453,863  440,664  Total  UN SD G S AND TARGE TS  41,692  Groundwater  507,365  484,122  471,737  Various initiatives were implemented in the diﬀerent plants to increase eﬃcient water management, notably: × Fitting of innovative equipment or technologies to reduce water use; × Monitoring and rescheduling of times and length of irrigation;  SDG 6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by reducing pollution, eliminating dumping and minimizing release of hazardous chemicals and materials, halving the proportion of untreated wastewater and substantially increasing recycling and safe reuse globally.  × Implementing of measures to reduce pollutants disposed of in the water, namely via changes to the waste water treatment plants (WWTPs); × Regular analysis of abstracted water, via competent external bodies, to detect and eliminate groundwater contamination.  SDG 6.4 By 2030, substantially increase water-use eﬃciency across all sectors and ensure sustainable withdrawals and supply of freshwater to address water scarcity and substantially reduce the number of people suﬀering from water scarcity. SDG 6.5 By 2030, implement integrated water resources management at all levels, including through transboundary cooperation as appropriate. SDG 7.3 By 2030, double the global rate of improvement in energy eﬃciency. SDG 13.1 Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climaterelated hazards and natural disasters in all countries.  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  133   CASE STUDY Water Systems in the Floor and Wall Coverings BU Objective: To reduce water and energy use in the sanitary facilities of Amorim Revestimentos. Initiatives: Implementation of a water saving system via the ﬁtting of ﬂow restrictors on taps and showerheads and water-saving equipment on ﬂushes. Results: The ﬁtting of ﬂow restrictors on taps and showerheads reduced water use and energy to heat water by over 50%.  CASE STUDY Change to the Functioning of the WWTP at the Coruche Industrial Unit in the Raw Materials BU Objective: Due to a higher volume of water needing treatment after boiling the cork, the physical-chemical WWTP no longer had the necessary capacity and lost eﬃciency. Simultaneously, the biological WWTP, which treated the water to wash the disks, was being under-utilised. The aim was to raise eﬃciency in the treatment process by using the biological WWTP and: × Raise the volume of liquid eﬄuent treated; × Lower the organic chemical compounds (OCCs) in liquid eﬄuent; × Lower WWTP chemical use; × Move from 2 shifts to 1; Initiatives: In 2018, testing was undertaking on jointly treating two liquid eﬄuents (physical-chemical, and biological) for the ﬁrst time in a physical-chemical WWTP and then in a biological WWTP, via decantation in the biological reactor. A centrifuge to remove sludge, the junction of the physical-chemical and biological processes, and the reduction of chemical products in 2019 are planned. Results: After the ﬁrst tests, OCCs fell by over 50% and coagulant and ﬂocculent use dropped. At the end of the project, it is foreseen that the daily treatment of eﬄuent will be doubled.  134  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .   5.3.2. Product Quality and Responsibility Cork is the bark of the cork oak tree. It is a natural raw material that is harvested, without harm, from the tree over a nine-year cycle and has a series of properties which make it unique. It is light, waterproof, elastic and compressible, thermally and acoustically insulating, burns slowly and is highly resistant to wear and tear. Moreover, it is totally biodegradable, renewable, recyclable, reusable and can be continually recirculated in the economy. Cork is an excellent eco-friendly alternative to high-impact non-renewable materials and, in a world in which innovation and ecology go hand in hand, it is creating interest in more and more sectors which are exploiting its characteristics, creating new products and solutions that also help society to adapt, mitigate or correct the impacts of climate change, the dwindling of resources and environmental erosion, leading to industry’s transition to a low-carbon economy. Among the various projects implemented by Corticeira Amorim in this area, the following are of note: × Development of 100% natural solutions (Cork Stoppers BU); × Launch of WISE ﬂooring solutions (Floor and Wall Coverings BU); × Development of IMO-certiﬁed primary decking solutions (Composite Cork BU); × GreenURBANLIVING, an innovative cork solution for green façades (Insulation Cork BU).  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  135   CASE STUDY Development of 100% Natural Solutions in the Cork Stoppers BU Objective: To create a series of solutions with low environmental impact that provide an alternative to plastics. To that end, Amorim Top Series, in partnership with Amorim Cork Composites, has developed a 100% natural composite from granulated cork and natural polymer. This composite allows the production of more sustainable capsules. Initiatives: × Development of composites consisting of cork granules and polymer of natural origin; × Characterisation of the aesthetic aspect and physical and mechanical resistance of the product, amongst other things, making it possible to develop optimisation actions; × Pre-series production for market presentation. Results: This composite broadens the portfolio of Amorim Top Series by making available products with lower environmental impact consisting of at least 50% cork by volume and a 100% natural polymer. Prototype presented in 2018 with launch planned for 2019.  CASE STUDY Launch of WISE Flooring by the Floor and Wall Coverings BU Objective: To introduce onto the market the ﬁrst generation of Amorim ﬂooring solutions in which sustainability is absolutely central. WISE is an innovative and sustainable solution, a totally PVC-free product, with a negative carbon footprint, made of cork and recycled products. Initiatives: Development of a product whose structure is composed of integrated cork underlay followed by an innovative core – Cork Rigid Core – consisting of 94% cork and recycled materials. An additional layer of cork serves to reinforce the acoustic and thermal comfort and it is ﬁnished with a cork or wood appearance – natural decoration (cork), digital printing (wood) or non-PVC printed ﬁlm (wood). Results: WISE is a sustainable product with a negative carbon footprint. It is totally PVC-free and has all the main indoor air quality certiﬁcations: TUV, A+ and underway Green Guard, Blue Angel, F4stars and EPD. It was launched in January 2019. 136  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .   CASE STUDY Development of IMO-Certiﬁed Primary Decking by the Composite Cork BU Objective: Development of a cork solution for the primary decking of ships in compliance with International Maritime Organization (IMO) safety standards, in particular in terms of ﬁre and smoke performance. Initiatives: × Compiling of requirements and creation of a value proposition. Analysis of international standards; × Development of a new outdoor primary decking material in which cork’s organic and recyclable nature, lightness and forestry origin meet the needs of green shipbuilding and sustainability in the naval sector. Results: × First cork solution for this purpose to comply with legislation and to stand out for its thermal and light weight properties (weight reduction of over 50%). This solution has unique credentials in economic and sustainability terms, namely with regards to origin, safety and the carbon footprint of materials used on ships in terms of the growing demand for alternative and sustainable solutions; × First product from Amorim Cork Composites to be certiﬁed in this area. Used on renowned vessels, river cruisers and polar exploration ships, amongst others.  CASE STUDY GreenURBANLIVING, Innovative Cork Solution for Green Façades by the Insulation Cork BU Objective: In a sector traditionally dominated by synthetic materials, this project aims to place expanded cork agglomerate, a 100% natural product, at the heart of new green façade systems. Initiatives: Project led by Amorim Isolamentos and developed by a national consortium bringing together the Institute for Instituto de Investigação e Desenvolvimento Tecnológico para a Construção, Energia, Ambiente e Sustentabilidade (ITeCons), Neoturf and the Associação Nacional para a Qualidade nas Instalações Prediais (ANQIP). The project is focusing on digitally modelling green roofs and façades that may be irregular in shape with the possibility of establishing diﬀerent forms of ﬂowerbeds and conceiving rooﬁng systems to be applied in sloping environments. Results: A model of rooﬁng which, by using cork, has higher environmental and energy performance than conventional rooﬁng. Among its main technical beneﬁts, also of note is thermal comfort and excellent drainage and retention capacity, with a major contribution to water eﬃciency in buildings and urban rainwater management.  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  137   5.3.3. Local Impact All agents have an environmental impact. Corticeira Amorim is concerned about these impacts and is implementing measures to mitigate them, adapted to the speciﬁc characteristics of each unit: × Regular noise measurements and active noise reduction measures, such as encapsulating machinery and engines; × Chimney emission controls and speciﬁc measures to avoid dust and particle emissions by ﬁtting ﬁlters; × Employee training on best practices to avoid spills, with spill kits available; × Emergency response procedures in force.  138  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .   5.4. C IRCUL AR ECONOMY  0 Cork waste 478 tons of recycled cork 90% valorised residues According to the WBCSD – World Business Council for Sustainable Development, the Circular Economy is a $ 4,5 trillion opportunity that oﬀers major potential for global economic growth and will also help society accelerate towards a sustainable future. Corticeira Amorim has identiﬁed optimising the use and consumption of cork throughout the production cycle as a key strategy. By-products generated during the cork stopper production process and cork that does not meet production standards are used in other high added-value applications. Cork not suitable for use in such products is used as a source of energy in the form of biomass, deemed neutral in terms of CO2 emissions.  As a result, there is no wastage and no cork waste is generated – no cork is lost and everything is used to generate value. Even the raw material generated by the maintenance of cork oak forests (pruning trimmings) is used in the production of ﬂoor and wall coverings and insulation cork solutions, as well as for a multiplicity of other purposes. The diagram below illustrates the cork transformation process adopted by Corticeira Amorim, and some of the applications resulting from its integral application, a paradigmatic case of the circular economy. Since cork is a material that promotes synergies with other materials, in addition to full use of cork, Corticeira Amorim uses by-products from other industries, whenever feasible, thereby saving the planet’s natural resources and reducing the problems associated with their depletion . Within this framework, the main initiatives include the “Circular Economy” project, implemented in the Composite Cork BU and various initiatives for selective collection and recycling of cork, which is noted in subchapter 5.4.1. Recycling Cork.  UN SD G S AND TARGE TS  Decent Work and Economic Growth  Responsible Consumption and Production  SDG 8.4 Improve progressively, through 2030, global resource eﬃciency in consumption and production and endeavour to decouple economic growth from environmental degradation, in accordance with the 10-year framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and production, with developed countries taking the lead. SDG 12.2 By 2030, achieve the sustainable management and eﬃcient use of natural resources. SDG 12.4 By 2020, achieve the environmentally sound management of chemicals and all wastes throughout their life cycle, in accordance with agreed international frameworks, and signiﬁcantly reduce their release to air, water and soil in order to minimize their adverse impacts on human health and the environment. SDG 12.5 By 2030, substantially reduce waste generation through prevention, reduction, recycling and reuse.  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  139   CORK  Reproduction Cork  Cork Refuse  Shoe Industry Buoys Sports Items  Stoppers Discs  Decorative Items  By Products  By Products GRANULATED CORK Cork Stoppers  Cork Stoppers Composite Cork  Insulation Cork Board Expanded Cork  By Products Insulation Cork Material  Floor and Wall Coverings Floor Coverings  Composite Materials  Wall Coverings  Technical Applications  Regranulated Cork  New Applications  Industrial Applications  Cork Dust  Biomass  Other Applications  CASE STUDY Circular Economy in the Composite Cork BU Objective: The creation of Amorim Cork Composites within the Corticeira Amorim group of companies exempliﬁes the use of by-products and other sources of cork that, due to their technical characteristics, are of little interest for the production of cork stoppers. The development of composite materials, which incorporate by-products from various industries, beyond the world of cork, makes it possible to give life to new products for a wide range of applications in the most diverse business segments. The “circular economy” project consists of identifying and valuing these materials. Waste products generated by Amorim Cork Composites’ production operations are also incorporated into manufacturing processes. This circular economy model, complemented by other materials, covers several areas of the company, and focuses in particular on innovation, procurement and industrialisation, with the objective of valuing cork, using it in its optimal quantity, in combination with other materials. Initiatives: × Deﬁnition of a strategy for large scale procurement and contracting of alternative raw materials; 140  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP ORT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MORIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .  × Installation of a new grinding and agglomeration line; × Identiﬁcation and implementation of new agglomeration processes; × Development of new products / raw materials based on the circular economy. These products combine cork with other carbon neutral raw materials, raw materials with a negative carbon footprint, or by-products from other industries. Results: × Identiﬁcation of more than 5 thousand tons of materials of potential interest; × Higher than 180% increase in the consumption of this type of material; × Increased eﬃciency and production capacity by more than 260%; × Development of a portfolio of new products based on the circular economy.   5.4.1. Recycling cork One of the environmental advantages of recycling cork lies in the fact that it incorporates carbon absorbed by the cork oak tree, which is held there throughout the cork’s lifetime. Increasing the life cycle of cork through recycling delays the release of this carbon back into the atmosphere. Although not used in cork stoppers, recycled cork can have a second life and be used for a multiplicity of other purposes, extending its life cycle and the related environmental beneﬁts. Cork stoppers and other cork products are collected, treated and ground at one of three Corticeira Amorim industrial units in Portugal licensed for recycling cork. After being processed into granules, it can be reintegrated into the production process and used to produce composite and insulation cork agglomerates. The company supports several initiatives for the selective collection and recycling of cork stoppers, a concept that originated in Portugal in 2008 with the launch of the Green Cork project, a partnership between Corticeira Amorim and Quercus, Portugal’s leading environmental association. The project was subsequently extended to other countries, including Spain, the US, Canada, France, Italy, the UK, South Africa and Australia. In 2018, 478 tons of cork were recycled through the various programmes, corresponding to 87% stoppers and 13% other products. The main ongoing initiatives in 2018 are listed below, highlighting the campaign developed in 2018 with the Auchan Group in France.  Program  Description Implemented since 2008, Green Cork is a project managed by Quercus to collect cork stoppers for recycling. It is developed in partnership with Corticeira Amorim and several other partners. Its main objectives are to collect cork stoppers and finance the planting of native trees, through the Common Forest project. http://www.greencork.org/participe/ In operation since 2011, this initiative involves associations and institutions that mobilise around 1 000 volunteers and manage more than 5 000 collection points throughout Italy. For every ton of cork stoppers collected, a donation is made to institutions, thereby financing charity projects, while favouring the circular economy, giving a new lease of life to recycled cork. http://www.amorimcorkitalia.com/campagna-etico Launched in France in 2009 with the aim of strengthening customer relations allied to environmental protection and various charity institutions. Today it is the world’s biggest cork recycling initiative. http://www.ecobouchon.com/ The largest cork stopper recycling programme in North America, adopted in 2008 by the Canadian shoe company SOLE. The cork stoppers collected via the project’s network of more than 3 000 partners are forwarded to units that transform and subsequently incorporate them into the production of shoe soles produced by SOLE. https://recork.org/  Launched in 2013 in South Africa, this initiative aims to collect used or surplus cork stoppers to give them a new lease of life. https://www.amorimcork.co.za/about-cork/  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  141   CASE STUDY Cork Stopper Recycling Campaign with Auchan Objective: In partnership with the French retail chain Auchan, a recycling campaign was conducted that aimed to raise consumer awareness of the importance of recycling cork stoppers, while emphasising the excellent environmental credentials of this natural raw material. Initiatives: During the traditional Autumn Wine Fair, 641 stores in the Auchan chain in France have collected used cork stoppers, by encouraging their customers to take part in one of France’s biggest cork recycling initiatives. Subsequently, the corks collected were delivered to Amorim France, which is responsible for forwarding them for recycling. Results: The cork oak tree is a biological carbon sink. Using its roots, leaves, trunk and bark – i.e. cork – to retain CO2 throughout its life cycle. Through recycling, this carbon retention capacity is prolonged. Since launch of the EcoBouchon programme in 2009, over 1 000 tons of cork stoppers have been collected and recycled in France. This recycling programme also has a social responsibility dimension: for every ton of corks collected, Auchan and Corticeira Amorim donate €300 to a charity.  5.4.2. Waste Corticeira Amorim does not consider cork dust as waste, but uses it as an energy resource. In 2018, 90% of the total waste generated by Corticiera Amorim was recycled by authorised agents and only 10% was eliminated.  2018  2017  2016  Hazardous Industrial Waste  373  282  249  Recovery  237  170  116  Disposal  135  112  134  10,059  8,544  9,559  Recovery  9,114  7,811  8,683  Disposal  945  733  876  10,432  8,826  9,808  Non – Hazardous Industrial Waste  Total  (ton)  The company recognises the importance of recovering waste with a view to prolonging its useful life in the economy and reaping the associated beneﬁts and has implemented work processes or technologies to reduce, recycle or reuse waste. In 2018, the most relevant examples of this practice are: the Recupera project of the Floor and Wall Coverings BU and the project to develop an underlay based on composites from the circular economy, in the Composite Cork BU. It is also important to note the existence of processes in the diﬀerent manufacturing plants for labelling, storing, handling and transporting dangerous products.  142  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .   CASE STUDY Recupera project by the Floor and Wall Coverings BU Objective: To incorporate cork waste in new composite cork products. In the production process of Amorim Revestimentos diﬀerent product families, namely the cutting operation and creation of the locking system, “waste” is generated which, prior to the implementation of this project, had to be sent to landﬁlls. With the Recupera project, these surpluses are incorporated into the production processes of technical solutions, using composite cork. Initiatives: × Separation of the surpluses resulting from the cutting operation (polymers vs natural ﬁbres); × Treatment and classiﬁcation in order to be reintroduced into the production process; × Incorporation of the waste with polymers into the processes of agglomerating cork composites with polymers (Subertech press); × Incorporation of natural ﬁbres into the cork agglomeration processes. Results: Project currently underway aimed at incorporating 600 tons per year of cork composite waste in agglomeration processes using the Subertech press and 700 tons per year of natural ﬁbres in cork agglomeration processes.  CASE STUDY Development of Underlay Based on Composites from the Circular Economy by the Composite Cork BU Objective: The circular economy concept and the development of materials which, in addition to being recyclable, use recycled raw materials themselves are increasingly central issues in a competitive market with growing environmental concerns. With the aim of oﬀering diﬀerentiating and sustainable products, Amorim Cork Composites developed an underlay with excellent acoustic and thermal performance. Using the optimal quantity of cork and combining it with other composites from the circular economy, it was possible to create a competitive product that meets the needs of the laminate ﬂooring segment, which is currently the largest slice of the ﬂooring market. Initiatives: Initially, there was identiﬁcation of, and procurement from, industries with the greatest potential for waste, as a source of complementary raw materials. After the existence of the raw material was ensured, there was internal development of the product: × Deﬁnition of the requirements and identiﬁcation of the main market needs; × Development of diﬀerent iterations, combining cork with diﬀerent composites in perfect balance until achieving the product that fully complies with all the initially chosen requirements; × Performance of tests in accredited laboratories for product certiﬁcation; Results: The product is in full launch phase. The product’s characteristics will contribute to bolstering a circular economy business model.  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  143   144  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .   6  PROMOTE PEOPLE’S DEVELOPMENT, SAFETY AND WELL-BEING Of the employees represented in this report, over 94% belong to industrial-based ﬁrms. The indicators shown in this chapter are therefore inﬂuenced by the predominance of operational management activities and should be relativized in that sense. Firms not included in this analysis, whose workers account for around 26% of the population, predominantly encompass commercial and business support activities, which would alter some of the indicators. 6.1.TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT  100% of employees covered by a collective employment contract (Portugal) 1.35 Ratio of the lowest salary to the national minimum salary (Portugal) 55 Thousand training hours By developing knowledge, improving skills and increasing community resilience, employee training and development are key pillars of sustainable development. The employee dedication and commitment guarantee is a fundamental directive in Corticeira Amorim’s personnel management policies and practices. Ensuring a safe and healthy working environment, promoting the development of skills in a challenging context and driving professional and personal development of its employees are speciﬁc aims of the company’s human resources, with growing concern and consequent investment in this management area over recent years. The management of human resources, geared to achieving these strategic objectives, follows people management and motivation policies set out here: https://www.amorim.com/en/sustainability/ integrated-management-system/policies-and-management-system/. The policies: × Adopt and assume the principle of freedom of association; × Promote a physically, socially and psychologically safe and healthy work environment and continually seek to evolve by adopting the best techniques and practices in this ﬁeld;  × Implement people management practices in the ﬁeld of recruitment and skill development that promote non-discrimination and equality of opportunity, building work environments where plurality and diﬀerence are a factor for continuous improvement and innovation; × Adopt leadership practices by example, which value learning and development, as well as recognition and compensation practices based on merit and exempt from judgments of a discriminatory nature. UN SD G S AND TARGE TS:  Quality Education  Gender Equality  Decent Work and Economic Growth  SDG 4.3 By 2030, ensure equal access for all women and men to aﬀordable and quality technical, vocational and tertiary education, including university. SDG 4.7 By 2030, ensure that all learners acquire the knowledge and skills needed to promote sustainable development, including, among others, through education for sustainable development and sustainable lifestyles, human rights, gender equality, promotion of a culture of peace and non-violence, global citizenship and appreciation of cultural diversity and of culture’s contribution to sustainable development. SDG 4.b By 2020, substantially expand globally the number of scholarships available to developing countries, in particular least developed countries, small island developing States and African countries, for enrolment in higher education, including vocational training and information and communications technology, technical, engineering and scientiﬁc programmes, in developed countries and other developing countries. SDG 5.1 End all forms of discrimination against all women and girls everywhere. SDG 5.2 Eliminate all forms of violence against all women and girls in the public and private spheres, including traﬃcking and sexual and other types of exploitation. SDG 5.5 Ensure women’s full and eﬀective participation and equal opportunities for leadership at all levels of decisionmaking in political, economic and public life. SDG 5.c Adopt and strengthen sound policies and enforceable legislation for the promotion of gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls at all levels. SDG 8.5 By 2030, achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all women and men, including for young people and persons with disabilities, and equal pay for work of equal value.  × Promote the implementation of the principles and the adoption of the practices set out in the Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct and in public commitments that should characterise internal relations between employees, as well as their interactions with diﬀerent stakeholders;  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  145   6.1.1. Employment  The demographic employment indicators did not change signiﬁcantly in relation to previous years. The overall number of employees increased (in the sustainability and global perimeter) and the hiring structure remained stable (84% permanent employees), as well as the breakdown between male and female employees.  25% Female workers 84% Employees with permanent employment contract  It should be noted that one of the main input streams are production operators in order to respond to variations in business activity. In general, these needs are ﬁlled by recruiting male workers, due to the physical demands of the jobs. If we look at other types of categories, in particular management support technicians, we see a trend towards more and more intense recruitment of female employees.  99% Full time employees 86% Employees in Portugal  The prevalence of direct employment contracts and, within these, those of permanent employees demonstrates Corticeira Amorim’s eﬀective commitment to employment policies that favour stability and the company’s medium– and long-term commitment to its workforce.  Total number of employees by professional categor y, gender and age range <30  Age 30 a 50  >50  Female  Male  Directors  0  7  16  0  23  Managers  0  50  42  12  80     Gender  Heads of Department  14  61  25  33  67  Sales Staff  5  62  26  13  80  Management Support Technicians  75  114  28  90  127  Team Leaders  6  42  46  16  Total  78  Administrative Staff  18  139  68  129  96  Maintenance, Quality and Logistics Technicians  49  203  109  85  276  Production Operators  306  1,076  699  453  1,628  Total 2016  364  1,539  965  716  2,152  2,868  Total 2017  395  1,548  956  737  2,162  2,899  Total 2018  473  1,753  1,060  831  2,455  3,286  Number and rate of turnover and new hires by age range, gender and region 2018  2017  2016  Number of hires  455  362  339  Rate of new hires  14%  12%  12%  <30  7%  6%  5%  30 a 50  6%  6%  6%  >50  1%  1%  1%  Female  3%  3%  3%  Male  11%  10%  9%  Portugal  9%  10%  9%  Rest of the World  4%  3%  3%  Number of exits  475  344  323  Turnover rate  14%  12%  11%  <30  4%  4%  3%  30 a 50  6%  5%  5%  >50  5%  3%  3%  Female  3%  2%  2%  Male  11%  10%  9%  Portugal  11%  9%  8%  3%  3%  3%  Rest of the World  146  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .   6.1.2. Labour Relations  22% Employees exercise the right to freedom of association 100% Employees covered by collective bargaining agreements between APCOR and the trade unions of the sector (Portugal) Freedom of association is a right of all Corticeira Amorim employees and is actively exercised by 22% of those covered by this report. To regulate working conditions in Portugal, collective labour contracts that cover 100% of employees are agreed on by APCOR and the trade unions that represent the sector’s workers. This agreement has covered topics such as work schedules, remuneration, access to training, among others. It is worth noting the ratio of 1.35 between the lowest wage agreed in the collective bargaining agreement (€ 775.51) and the national minimum wage. The diﬀerent companies also have internal bodies that represent employees (trade union commissions, workers’ commissions, occupational health and safety commissions) and participate in various aspects of the day-to-day life of the companies. In terms of labour relations, it should also be mentioned that the company awards salary bonuses and other supplements of a diﬀerent nature, among other beneﬁts. In particular employees have access to a hospitalisation insurance policy and workers in the units of the company’s head oﬃce have access to curative medical consultations; support for the education of employees and their children, through the granting of school grants and merit scholarships to employees’ children; two extra days of vacation; recognition and celebratory initiatives throughout the year, that include oﬀering toys to the younger children of employees and Christmas baskets for all employees. There are also programmes implemented to monitor the organisational climate and internal communication plans, which are considered to be fundamental for the involvement and commitment of the employees in the company’s day-to-day activities and projects. The main initiatives include the organisational climate study carried out in the Raw Materials BU and the launch of the Linkpeople platform – a digital platform that enables interactivity between managers and employees (in particular performance management) between employees and human resource management departments and even between employees.    CASE STUDY Study of the Organisational Climate at the Raw Materials BU Objective: Given the need to have an up-to-date portrait of the organisational climate, the Raw Materials BU conducted a study to discover employees’ opinions about their working environment and to understand their needs and expectations and the importance and value given to their working environment. Initiatives: × Diagnosis: distribution of questionnaires to all employees, with voluntary involvement in the survey. The questionnaire addresses the most important aspects under climate surveys: communication, teamwork, relations with colleagues and bosses, salaries and recognition; × Results analysis: data analysis, comparing the current situation with those in 2011 and 2014; × Meeting with the direct bosses of each factory to disclose the results and create an action plan; × Creating an action plan: after identifying the lower-scoring issues, an improvement plan was created. Results: After changes to the organisational model of the Raw Materials BU, various improvements were implemented in January 2017 with a positive impact on the organisational climate, as the study suggests. Included among the most signiﬁcant results are: × A roughly 18% improvement in all the points obtained in every question compared to the last study in 2014, and over 27% compared to 2011; × 97% of the questions have higher results relative to the previous survey; × Increased positive responses in the questions on social/ sustainability responsibility; An action plan is currently underway aimed at continuing and improving all points, chieﬂy those with the lowest scores.  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  147   6.1.3. Training and Education  54,847 Total training hours 17 Hours of training on average per employee Corticeira Amorim is aware that the present and future performance of the business is highly dependent on the company’s ability to develop its personnel. Emphasising the stability of the workforce, the focus on adapting and developing the abilities and skills will ensure a continual performance that matches employees’ ambitions. Whether at the technical level or the management or behavioural level, the company identiﬁes diﬀerent population segments and acts in an increasingly speciﬁc manner on them. Average number of training hours 17 14  13  2016  2017  2018  Average number of training hours per employee, by gender and professional categor y 35,758  68  36  19,090  35  17,980  14,661  29  23  21 19  14  15  7,519 9  5  3,357  3,539  3,156  2,728  1,785 125  Directors  Managers  Total hours training  148  Heads of Department  Sales Staﬀ  Management Support Technicians  Team Leaders  Production Administrative Maintenance Operators Staﬀ Quality and Logistics Technicians  Hours per employee  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .  Female  Male   In 2018, there was a signiﬁcant increase in training hours at Corticeira Amorim. This occurred across the board but focused in particular on production employees and technical and supervisory staﬀ. It should be highlighted that the project involved implementation of a new ERP (SAP) in the Raw Materials BU and involved a very high number of training hours. In addition to the technical aspects, the eﬀort being made to convert skills to raise the qualiﬁcations of the current workforce as far as possible must be stressed. The SAP implementation project that will be introduced successively across all Corticeira Amorim group companies by 2021 includes precisely a “management of change” component with a concern to maximize the likely success of the process, both from the management and behavioural perspective. In addition to this, there is a constant concern to optimise current skills and to enhance the development of new skills and qualiﬁcations of current employees without calling the project’s conditions for success into question. The plans and actions implemented to upgrade occupational health and safety involved investment in training operators and management, contributing to upgrading skills and attitudes in this area. Also of note are the programmes for young employees (internships for young employees) and direct bosses that add a signiﬁcant amount to this total.  CASE STUDY “From Bark to Bottle” Training Programme at the Cork Stoppers BU Objective: To promote a deeper knowledge of the business among the company’s employees via theoretical and practical training encompassing all the processes and products, from raw materials to markets and R&D+I, and enhancing people’s involvement with the business and the organisational culture in the context of wine culture and sustainable development. Initiatives: A training programme with a heavy practical component developed in the IUs that includes modules on the choice of raw materials and natural stoppers. It is currently held twice a year, taught by 24 trainers including high-level directors, and, due to the proximity to the business, employees from the Raw Materials BU will also take part in the programme, both as trainers and trainees. Results: Dynamic in format, the training programme “From Bark to Bottle” contributes to greater knowledge of the business, history and culture of the group, oﬀering a global vision and, simultaneously, an awareness of the group’s hierarchical structure. Equally, it boosts employees’ involvement with the company, conveying a passion for cork, throughout the organisation, and fostering contact with people, processes and products.  SUSTAINABILIT Y REP ORT —  149   6.1.4. Diversity, Equal Oppor tunities and Nondiscrimination Corticeira Amorim advocates people management and motivation policies that promote non-discrimination and equal opportunity in the recruitment, promotion and training of its employees, as well as in their remuneration and working conditions. The criteria of equity and promoting merit govern decisions in every situation, never factors based on gender, age, race or religion. Social realities and the gender imbalance found in certain roles and positions in diﬀerent organisations and institutions is obviously transposed into the organisational reality of Corticeira Amorim, which was founded more than a century ago and is not detached from the context in which it operates. Corticeira Amorim bases its people management practices on evaluating merit and rewarding performance. The company does not restrict the access of women to any professional positions or categories, nor are increases in remuneration aﬀected by factors that are not based on skills and real performance. The ratios shown represent a positive change in gender equality. The company’s intervention in this area includes, in particular, communication and awareness initiatives for this key issue that currently faces our society and measures aimed at striking a healthy balance between work / family life.  6.1.5. Well-being of employees Corticeira Amorim provides employees with a series of beneﬁts aimed at their well-being in addition to working time and which have a positive impact on reconciling personal and family life, namely: × In health terms, most companies in Portugal provide, in addition to mandatory occupational health insurance, curative medicine with the possibility of consultations at least twice a week which is often the level at which various pathologies, including mental health, are ﬁrst diagnosed. In addition, there is a ﬂu vaccination programme for employees and various types of health screening (ophthalmology, cardiovascular, respiratory, etc.). The BUs also have agreements with clinical laboratories, which take samples at the companies, and pharmacies, which deliver medicines to the facilities; × In educational terms, school subsidies are provided annually to all children of employees and student workers to support the purchase of school materials. In addition, it has introduced a scholarship programme for employees’ children to pay tuition fees for around 30 young people every year; × The company canteens can be used by employees’ direct family members and employees may acquire meals to take home, thereby facilitating everyday life in some cases; × Two additional days of holiday.  Salar y ratio between women and men, by professional categor y    2018  2017  2016  Managers  0.7  0.7  0.8  Heads of Department  0.9  0.8  0.7  Sales Staff Management Support Technicians Team Leaders  0.6  0.5  0.6  Administrative Staff Maintenance, Quality and Logistics Technicians Production Operators  0.8  0.9  0.8  1.2  1.1  1.0  1.1  1.1  1.1  0.9  0.9  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  Remuneration ratio between women and men, by professional categor y    2018  2017  2016  Managers  0.6  0.7  0.8  Heads of Department  0.9  0.7  0.7  Sales Staff Management Support Technicians Team Leaders  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.8  0.8  Administrative Staff Maintenance, Quality and Logistics Technicians Production Operators  150  1.1  1.0  0.9  1.0  1.1  1.0  0.9  0.8  0.8  0.9  0.9  0.9  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .   6.2. H EALTH AND SAFET Y AT WORK  50% Fewer accidents (2018-2020) The 2018 International Labour Organisation (ILO) report notes that 2,78 million workers die of injuries (13.7%) and related occupational illnesses (86.3%) every year. It also states that there are nearly one thousand times more injuries caused by illnesses and non-fatal accidents every year than by fatal accidents and that these non-fatal injuries aﬀect 374 million workers every year. Many of these have serious consequences on workers’ long-term ability to earn an income. Corticeira Amorim recognises that working conditions are one of the key factors in an organisation’s success. This commitment to occupational health and safety (OHS) is evident in the established goal to reduce the number of accidents by more than 50% by 2020, in the investments made, in the continual review of safety plans and in the monitoring of their eﬀectiveness and adequacy to the risks, reiterating the focus on this theme via the staﬀ commitment to speciﬁc targets in their personal goals contracts and in the awareness and training of all employees. On the subject of OHS, the BUs have implemented concrete measures, structured plans aimed at continual and sustained improvement of the practices and risk prevention, that reduce occurrences and mitigate the eﬀects, with a direct positive impact on the indicators in these areas. Corticeira Amorim’s health and safety goal is for the physical, social and psychological well-being of employees to be a constant in all its companies. Its objectives in this area include:  UN SD G S AND TARGE TS  Good Health and Well-Being  Decent Work and Economic Growth  SDG 3.6 By 2020, halve the number of global deaths and injuries from road traﬃc accidents. SDG 3.8 Achieve universal health coverage, including ﬁnancial risk protection, access to quality essential health-care services and access to safe, eﬀective, quality and aﬀordable essential medicines and vaccines for all. SDG 3.d Strengthen the capacity of all countries, in particular developing countries, for early warning, risk reduction and management of national and global health risks. SDG 8.8 Protect labour rights and promote safe and secure working environments for all workers, including migrant workers, in particular women migrants, and those in precarious employment.  × Improve the risk assessment and implementation of health and safety at work; × Improve the working conditions and well-being of its employees; × Reduce the frequency of work accidents; × Reduce the number of days lost due to accidents and occupational illnesses.  Accident frequency index 26.9  21.1  2016  20.9  2017  2018  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  151   Ratios of accidents, professional illnesses, lost days, and absenteeism, and number of work-related fatalities, by region 2018  2017  115  130  159  96  118  136  19  12  23  0  1  0  Accident frequency index  20.9  21.1  26.9  Portugal  20.0  22.2  26.2  Rest of the world  26.9  14.1  32.2  7.1  1.6  1.2  8.1  1.5  1.3  Accident frequency index Portugal Rest of the world Numer of fatalities  Work-related illness rate  *  **  Portugal  2016  Rest of the world  0.0  2.3  0.0  Lost working days rate  737  547  583  Portugal  700  515  573  Rest of the world  986  750  659  3.7%  3.4%  3.3%  Portugal  3.7%  3.5%  3.4%  Rest of the world  3.6%  3.4%  3.3%  Absenteeism rate  ***  * Accident in itinere in 2017 ** Changing criteria for the certiﬁcation of occupational disease, as well as validation of several cases pending from previous years *** Change in the calculation according to the methodological notes  The number of occupational accidents fell last year by around 12% and by even more in Portugal (19%). In line with these results, an overall reduction in the frequency index was seen. However, there was a rise in the rate of days lost due to certain accidents, which implied longer recovery periods. Since the end of 2017, Corticeira Amorim has implemented a plan to combat occupational accidents that encompasses various measures, namely the creation of a hygiene and safety at work forum composed of the OHS areas and by the general directors of each BU. This forum met four times in 2018, promoting discussion of the theme, benchmark results analysis and best practices. Bearing in mind all of the actions set out in the plan, it is believed that the results obtained will be even more visible and relevant in coming years. In the reporting period, there was a signiﬁcant rise in the occupational illness rate. The occurrence of new cases in 2018 was similar to previous years, but the noticeable worsening was due to the validation by oﬃcial bodies of various pending processes and the swifter and more aﬃrmative diagnosis of certain types of pathologies (e.g. tendinitis) as occupational illnesses. It is therefore also recognised that public occupational health services are more active and sensitive towards combating occupational illnesses. Absenteeism has remained relatively stable and 2018 was no exception. The recorded rise was due to a change in the basis of calculation according to the methodological notes. While not especially bad compared to the average for industrial companies in Portugal, this is an area where improvements are intended in coming years.  152  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .  Corticeira Amorim complies with all legal requirements, norms and decisions aﬀecting OHS in every country in which it has operations. Good practices in this area include: × Regulatory admission and periodical medical examinations in the workplace; × Provision of personal protection equipment; × Employee training in hygiene and safety adapted to the speciﬁc characteristics of each job; × Training of all those involved in the working processes, including service providers; × Hygiene and safety committees attended by employees and/ or employee representatives. Of note is the external international OHSAS ISO 18001 validation and certiﬁcation at one of the company’s units covering 14% of employees, which is intended to extend. ISO 45001 certiﬁcation is underway for another ﬁve Corticeira Amorim IUs, raising coverage to more than 35% of employees. Workers are also oﬀered voluntary health programmes.   CASE STUDY Physical Activity Project in the Raw Materials BU Objective: Given a workplace accident record of 40%, causing absence due to musculoskeletal disorders, the aim was to develop and implement a physical activity programme among employees that could: × Reduce workplace accidents; × Improve employees’ physical condition; × Correct incorrect posture and/or identify alternative ways of completing tasks; × Reduce work-related musculoskeletal disorders and resulting occupational illnesses. Initiatives: A programme with the following components was developed: × Ergonomic risk assessment by bodily area: a risk level is allocated for each task and by bodily area according to the breadth of movement, enforced posture, force and repetition; assessment of manual handling of loads; × Assessment of the organisational and physical conditions of the job; diagnosis of the characteristics of the existing working equipment and tools, comparing and adapting them to the ergonomic principles of the anthropometric study of the Portuguese population; × Assessment of the worker’s personal physical condition to identify the bodily structures most requested for tasks, identifying over-used structures and disuse leading to inactivity and lower tolerance to exertion. Results: × Improvement in the physical condition of almost 100% of employees, proven by the physical assessment indicators; × Lower workplace accidents and musculoskeletal disorders (no consequence of this type after implementing the programme); × Better team spirit; × Boosted discipline and team organisation; × General feeling among workers of the beneﬁts of the programme.  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  153   6.3. IM PACT ON THE LO CAL COMMUNIT Y  1,700 students involved in environmental education actions 20,500 trees planted since 2011 > 40 institutions supported every year Building resilient communities is vital to achieve sustainable development and companies have a key role in this. With over 4 400 workers spread around the globe, Corticeira Amorim recognises the importance of being an active agent in aiding communities to overcome the challenges they face. Concern for social balance accompanies Corticeira Amorim’s almost 150 years of operations. It was one of the ﬁrst companies to provide all workers with a canteen and a doctor as far back as 1938. Its concept of social responsibility is not limited purely to the strict circle of its workers, extending instead to the surrounding community, seeking to commit to this relationship too. UN SD G S AND TARGE TS  Quality Education  Decent Work and Economic Growth  SDG 4.4 By 2030, substantially increase the number of youth and adults who have relevant skills, including technical and vocational skills, for employment, decent jobs and entrepreneurship. SDG 4.a Build and upgrade education facilities that are child, disability and gender sensitive and provide safe, nonviolent, inclusive and eﬀective learning environments for all. SDG 8.6 By 2020, substantially reduce the proportion of youth not in employment, education or training.  154  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .  6.3.1. Natural Choice Programme The Natural Choice Programme, launched by Corticeira Amorim in 2008, with initiatives that are renewed annually, has as its main objectives: × raise awareness among employees and society in general, as citizens responsible for future generations, of the need for social solidarity and for more environmentally friendly behaviour; × ensure sustainable development practices are a positive factor of diﬀerentiation among diﬀerent stakeholder groups. a) Environmental education initiatives Collaboration with schools, from primary schools to business schools, in Portugal and abroad. Through sessions organised by employees at schools and school visits to the company’s facilities, more than 1 700 students participated in 2018 – 800 in school environments and 934 in company environments.  CASE STUDY From the montado to the Cork Stopper Objective: The Municipality of Santarem, with support from Corticeira Amorim, has been promoting the information and environmental awareness campaign -”From the montado to the Cork Stopper” to primary and middle schools in the municipality. This initiative aims to arouse the interest of the school community for Portugal’s native forest, revealing the cork forest’s ecosystem and the importance of the exploitation of cork to ensure conservation of the forests. Initiatives: The initiative, which begins in January of each year, foresees that participating schools will collect cork stoppers for recycling, which are forwarded to the Green Cork programme, organised by Quercus, of which the municipality has been a partner since June 2016. The school that collects the largest number of cork stoppers per student, in a 3-month period, is rewarded with a study visit to the Cork and Cork Tree Observatory and a cork forest that is being harvested in Coruche, enabling the students to learn about a species that has high cultural, economic and environmental value. Results: More than 395 students from diﬀerent schools took part in the initiative in 2018, thereby contributing to the Circular Economy.    b) Porto Futuro Programme Protocol with the Porto Municipal Council that supports the collaboration of Corticeira Amorim with a group of schools in the Portuguese city on transposing business practices to the schools:  CASE STUDY Decreased Consumption of Plastic Cups in the Cork Stoppers BU  × “Junior Achievement” volunteers – entrepreneurship and ﬁnancial education – participation of more than 100 volunteers since 2005; × Presence at the General Councils of the School Group; × Miscellaneous Projects; × Donation of computer equipment, ﬂoor and wall coverings and insulation materials. Sponsorship of merit awards.  c) Sustainability Forum 2018 A diverse panel of experts was invited to the 2018 edition of Corticeira Amorim’s Sustainability Forum, including Cláudia Coelho and Marta Antas Gago (PwC), Nuno Gaspar Oliveira (Esporão) and Aline Guerreiro (Portal da Construção Sustentável) who discussed important concepts for the industry with employees – such as the impact of the circular economy, trends and sustainability challenges and the value of ecosystem services. It was an opportunity to share key ideas for reﬂection about the positive impact of sustainability in the cork industry, in particular in relation to forests and the construction industry.  Objective: Plastic is currently one of the major contaminants of the oceans, interfering with natural biodiversity and causing various imbalances on the planet. Although plastics used by Amorim Champcork are subsequently recycled, their manufacture and recycling consumes energy and causes CO 2 emissions, contributing to the imbalance of ecosystems. The objective of this initiative is to reduce the environmental footprint by reducing consumption of plastic cups in this IU. Initiatives: Amorim Champcork consumed more than 7 000 plastic cups a month, equivalent to almost 20 kg of plastic per month. On average, each person consumes 155 cups / year, representing a cost of approximately €1 000 for the unit / year plus the costs related to recycling. By assigning re-usable cups to all employees, the sleeves of plastic cup were removed from the drinks dispensers. Results: Although the useful life of the re-usable cups has not yet been determined, this measure has reduced the consumption of single-use plastic cups in the IU. In addition to reduction of the environmental footprint, this measure allows an eﬀective saving of around € 2 000 per year.  d) Reforestation In line with initiatives organised in previous years, about 100 volunteers from Corticeira Amorim planted 2 000 cork oak trees in 2018. The initiative took place in the Monte da Torre estate, owned by Galveias Municipal Council. The initiative was carried out within the framework of the Common Forest project, which aims to create a native forest with high levels of biodiversity and production of ecosystem services, funded by Quercus’ Green Cork – cork stopper collection and recycling project – of which Corticeira Amorim has been a partner since its launch. By means of this initiative, volunteers from Corticeira Amorim have contributed, since 2011, to the planting of 20 500 native trees in Portugal, the majority of which have been cork oak trees. e) Other initiatives The involvement of the company and employees is evident in several initiatives related to sustainability issues – ranging from blood donation campaigns, organisation of sporting events, workshops and various competitions, participation in voluntary rehabilitation of school spaces, participation in humanitarian associations , internal campaigns for collecting books, food and clothing to be donated to social institutions, which require greater involvement with the Community and draw attention to social responsibility, healthy living and environmentally friendly lifestyles. Group companies also encourage the involvement of employees in the “Biological Gardens” project, providing spaces within their premises for the cultivation of vegetable gardens.  SUSTAINABILIT Y REP ORT —  155   6.3.2. Sponsorship and Donations a) Donations Over the years Corticeira Amorim has continually pursued a policy of donating materials to institutions of recognised merit with a capacity for social intervention, a practice with an evident social value that helps improve the quality of the services provided by those institutions. In 2018, several institutions – public, private and associative – beneﬁted from donations of a wide range materials (Corticeira Amorim products, oﬃce supplies, computer equipment and other items). Corticeira Amorim is a leading donor to the Albertina Ferreira de Amorim Foundation, public utility entity, to promote charity initiatives and to foster the ethical, religious, cultural and civilisational aspects of human advancement. The Foundation acts in two primary areas: support for scientiﬁc research in the ﬁeld of cork raw materials, and humanitarian and social support for causes and projects in the communities surrounding Corticeira Amorim companies. In 2018, it was active in making social, humanitarian and life-supporting interventions through ﬁnancial support or donations in kind to about 40 institutions in the areas of social insertion, foster care, support for the elderly, ﬁre brigade corporations, hospital units and the Liga Portuguesa Contra o Cancro, among others. b) Académie Amorim This is a non-proﬁt organisation, made up of scientists dedicated to wine research, with the objective of optimising the quality of the wine and ensuring that its aging process proceeds as expected. Since 1992 this institution founded in France by members of the third generation of the Amorim family, supports the researchers’ work by oﬀering them an annual scholarship that will reward the scientiﬁc work developed and contribute to improving knowledge about wine. In 2018, Grégoire Henry & Tristan Destremau, with the VINOVAE project, were awarded the GRAND INNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT PRIZE. In addition to recognising those who are dedicated to the study of wine and its environment, the Academy promotes thematic forums, to which it invites experts, and interested professionals who share the same passion for wine.  c) Other assistance Since Corticeira Amorim was founded, it has been a partner of the Bagos D’Ouro Association, an institution dedicated to supporting children and young people in need in the Douro region of Portugal. The Association provides assistance by supporting children’s school careers and creating opportunities for developing successful lives. The company is also a founding partner of the Terras de Santa Maria Foundation. Corticeira Amorim is represented on the board of directors of this foundation and annually awards a prize to the best management student at Portugal’s Instituto Superior Entre Douro e Vouga (ISVOUGA). The company also collaborates with numerous national and international initiatives, providing materials, know-how and technical support to the development of educational, research and artistic projects. In 2018, it collaborated with the following entities: Rhode Island School of Design (USA), Pratt Institute (USA), Elon University (USA), Copenhagen Contemporary (Denmark), Bonn Bundeskunsthalle Museum (Denmark), Domaine de Boisbuchet (France), Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation (Portugal) and Centro Cultural de Belém (Portugal).  156  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .   7  METHODOLOGICAL NOTES 7.1. P ERIMETER There was an alteration to the universe of companies that make up the perimeter considered in the Sustainability Report, in particular by the incorporation of three industrial units belonging to the Cork Stoppers BU: Socori, S.A., Socori Florestal, S.L. and Elfverson & Co. AB. In chapter 4. Promoting Research, Development and Innovation and Leverage Economic Performance, the values presented are those for the consolidated Corticeira Amorim Group (100% of companies included). In the remaining chapters, the companies included cover 86% of industrial units and 74% of the employees of the Corticeira Amorim at the end of 2018, as shown in the table below: Company  Location  Country  % 100%  Raw Materials Vale de Cortiças – Abrantes  Portugal  Amorim Florestal, S.A.  Amorim Natural Cork, S.A.  Ponte de Sôr  Portugal  100%  Amorim Florestal II, S.A.  Ponte de Sôr  Portugal  100%  Ponte de Sôr  Portugal  100%  San Vicente Alcántara  Spain  100%  Amorim Florestal III, S.A. Amorim Florestal España, SL Amorim Florestal Mediterrâneo, SL Amorim Tunisie, S.A.R.L . Comatral – C. de Maroc. de Transf. du Liège, S.A.  Cádiz  Spain  100%  Tabarka  Tunisia  100%  Skhirat  Morocco  100%  Société Nouvelle du Liège, S.A. (SNL)  Tabarka  Tunisia  100%  Société Tunisienne d'Industrie Bouchonnière  Tabarka  Tunisia  55%  Cork Stoppers Santa Maria Lamas  Portugal  100%  Amorim & Irmãos, S.A.  Amorim & Irmãos, SGPS, S.A.  Santa Maria Lamas  Portugal  100%  Amorim Champcork, SA  Santa Maria Lamas  Portugal  100%  Amorim Top Series, S.A.  Vergada  Portugal  75%  Paryd  Sweden  53%  Coruche  Portugal  100%  Girona  Spain  92%  Rio Meão  Portugal  60%  Cáceres  Spain  100%  S. Paio de Oleiros  Portugal  100%  Tholen  Netherlands  100%  Delmenhorts  Germany  100%  Elfverson & Co. AB Equipar, Participações Integradas, Lda. Francisco Oller, S.A. Socori, S.A. Socori Florestal, S.L . Floor and Wall Coverings Amorim Revestimentos, S.A. Amorim Benelux, BV Amorim Deutschland, GmbH – AR Amorim Flooring, SA  S. Paio de Oleiros  Portugal  100%  Zug  Switzerland  100%  Hanover – Maryland  U.S.A.  100%  Amorim Cork Composites, S.A.  Mozelos  Portugal  100%  Amorim Compcork, Lda  Mozelos  Portugal  100%  Trevor – Wisconsin  U.S.A.  100%  Corroios  Portugal  100%  Vendas Novas  Portugal  100% 100%  Amorim Flooring (Switzerland) AG Amorim Flooring North America Inc. Composite Cork  Amorim Cork Composites Inc. Amorim Industrial Solutions – Imobiliária, S.A. Isolamentos Amorim Isolamentos, S.A. Holding Company and Others Corticeira Amorim, SGPS, S.A.  Mozelos  Portugal  Amorim Cork Research, Lda.  Mozelos  Portugal  100%  Amorim Cork Services, Lda.  Mozelos  Portugal  100%  Amorim Cork Ventures, Lda  Mozelos  Portugal  100%  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  157   7.2. SU PPLY CHAIN – UP STREAM AND D OWNSTREAM ACTIVITIE S IN THE VALUE CHAIN  7.5. E NERGY EFFICIENCY AND CLIMATE CHANGE – EMISSIONS  In the case of energy consumption by suppliers outside the organisation, and since there are no conversion factors in the bibliography that enable accurate data to be determined, Corticeira Amorim has estimated energy consumption, based on the value of emissions and emission factors of its own fuels, and several assumptions had to be made. For this reason, the calculation presented herein is an estimate. Corticeira Amorim aims to continue working to consolidate the methodology used. The ﬁgures presented, consider the most important aspects of Corticeira Amorim’s value chain, for its activity in Portugal (excluding Socori, S.A.).  In order to calculate CO2 emissions, the conversion factors used in the SGCIE audits were considered. In the case of emissions associated with electricity consumption (market-based method), the report used information available at the time of writing from the supplier Endesa. Emissions outside Portugal were considered to be of marginal material importance (about 7%):  In this context, the following activities and assumptions were considered:  64.1  Natural Gas (kg CO 2 /GJ)  63  Propane (kg CO 2 /GJ)  74  Diesel (kg CO 2 /GJ)  69.2  Gasoline (kg CO 2 /GJ)  0  Biomass (cork powder) (kg CO 2 /GJ) Biomass (other) (kg CO2/GJ)  × Upstream and downstream transport and distribution: the quantity of product bought and sold was considered, which corresponds to 95% of the total; emission factors associated with the transportation of products by sea, air and / or road;  0  Electricity – 2016 supplier (g CO 2 /kWh) Electricity – 2017 supplier (g CO 2 /kWh)  480.24  Electricity – 2018 supplier (g CO 2 /kWh) *  480.24  Electricity – location: Portugal (g CO 2 /kWh)  × Residues generated in operations: the total waste produced and the waste sent to the respective recipients were considered; emission factors associated with road transport per ton transported;  381.58  470.00  *information available to date  7.6. E NERGY EFFICIENCY AND CLIMATE CHANGE – ENERGY INTENSIT Y AND CARBON INTENSIT Y  × Business trips: emission ﬁgures calculated by the travel agency; × Transport of employees: the distance travelled by employees was measured; emission factor associated with road transport by the distance travelled by employees between home-work-home. The source of information for all the emission factors was the factors published by the GHG Protocol and Defra – Department for Environment, Food & Rural Aﬀairs. 7.3. E CONOMIC PERFOR MANCE The amounts presented refer to Corticeira Amorim’s consolidated values (100% of the companies included). Revenues correspond to the sum of the following items: sales and provision of services; supplementary income; operating subsidies; own works; other operating income; ﬁnancial income and gains; capital gains from real-estate (after deducting capital losses). Operating costs do not include depreciation. Investment in the community includes only the value of donations in cash and does not include contributions and donations in kind.  The diversity of Corticeira Amorim’s applications and businesses makes it diﬃcult to deﬁne an indicator that clearly shows the evolution of CO2 emissions in relation to activity levels. Over time, eﬀorts have been made to respond to this need by analysing diﬀerent indicators and in recent years the company has opted for the ratio of emissions to the value of total sales. This indicator involves some limitations, namely those related to the diﬀerences between the perimeter considered in the numerator (more restricted) and the perimeter considered in the (broader) denominator. These become more evident in years when there have been material changes in the perimeter of companies under consideration. To maintain the comparability of the indicator, the eﬀect of the acquired companies that are not part of the sustainability perimeter is excluded, in the calculation of the energy intensity and carbon intensity of activities in 2018, with the consolidated sales value considered for that year being €753 million. 7.7. H EALTH AND SAFET Y AT WORK The procedure for calculating the frequency index, the rate of occupational illnesses and the rate of lost days was changed according to the International Labour Organisation (ILO) Code of Practice. The formulas considered are as follows: × Frequency index = Number accidents/ Hours of work x 1,000,000.  7.4. E NERGY EFFICIENCY AND CLIMATE CHANGE – ENERGY In 2018, use was made of the conversion factors used in audits within the framework Energy Intensive Consumption Management System (SGCIE), ministerial order 17313/2008: Natural Gas (GJ/1000m 3)  37.9  Propane (GJ/t)  42.8  Gasoline (GJ/t)  44.5  Biomass (cork powder) (GJ/t)  15.7  × Lost Days Rate = Number of days lost/ Hours of work x 1,000 000.  46.7  Diesel (GJ/t)  × Occupational illness rate = Number of cases of occupational diseases/ Hours of work x 1,000,000.  Biomass (other) (GJ/t) Electricity (GJ/kWh)  11.6 0.0036  × Absenteeism rate = Days of absence/Potential days of work. There was also a change in the formula for calculation of potential days, in which the accounting of holidays was eliminated, which led to a 17% reduction in the number of potential days, with a direct eﬀect on the absenteeism rate. For the calculation of the frequency index, only the accidents that give rise to lost days are considered. To determine the number of days lost, the number of workdays is considered. Counting begins the day after the accident occurs and stops when the employee returns to work.  158  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .   SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  159   8  GRI TABLE GRI ref.  Description  Value / Location  GRI 102 – GENERAL DISCLOSURES 2016 Organisational Profile 102-1  Name of the organization  2. Corticeira Amorim – 2.1. Organisational Profile – 2.1.1. Identification  102-2  Activities, brands, products, and services  2. Corticeira Amorim – 2.1. Organisational Profile – 2.1.3. Main Products and Services  102-3  Location of headquarters  2. Corticeira Amorim – 2.1. Organisational Profile – 2.1.1. Identification  102-4  Location of operations  Consolidated Annual Report 31-12-2018 – Worldwide Presence  102-5  Ownership and legal form  2. Corticeira Amorim – 2.1. Organisational Profile  102-6  Markets served  2. Corticeira Amorim – 2.1. Organisational Profile – 2.1.3. Main Products and Services | Consolidated Annual Report 31-12-2018 – Worldwide Presence  Scale of the organization  2. Corticeira Amorim – 2.1. Organisational Profile | 6. Promote People’s Development, Safety and Well-Being – 6.1. Training and Development – 6.1.1. Employment | Consolidated Annual Report 31-12-2018 – Organizational Chart | Consolidated Management Report – 10. Consolidated Demonstration of the Financial Position and 11. Main Consolidated Figures  102-7  6. Promote People’s Development, Safety and Well-Being – 6.1. Training and Development – 6.1.1. Employment Total number of employees by gender and employment contract Woman Permanent Fixed Term Contract Men Permanent Fixed Term Contract TOTAL Total number of employees by region and employment contract 102-8  Information on employees and other workers  Portugal Permanent Fixed Term Contract Rest of the World Permanent Fixed Term Contract TOTAL Total number of employees by gender and type of work Woman Full-time Part-time Men Full-time Part-time TOTAL  160  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .  2018  2017  2016  831 707 124 2,455 2,041 414 3,286  737 630 107 2,162 1,753 409 2,899  716 622 94 2,152 1,739 413 2,868  2018  2017  2016  2,810 2,312 498 476 436 40 3,286  2,469 1,991 478 430 392 38 2,899  2,447 1,966 481 421 395 26 2,868  2018  2017  2016  831 824 7 2,455 2,423 32 3,286  737 727 10 2,162 2,125 37 2,899  716 708 8 2,152 2,129 23 2,868   GRI ref.  Description  Value / Location  102-9  Supply chain  2. Corticeira Amorim – 2.4. Supply Chain  102-10  Significant changes to the organization and its supply chain  In 2018, Corticeira Amorim announced the acquisition of 70% of the Elfverson & Co. AB and 100% of the Cosabe – Companhia Silvo-Agrícola da Beira, S.A.  102-11  Precautionary Principle or approach  Corporate Governance Report – C. Internal Organisation  102-12  External initiatives  2. Corticeira Amorim – 2.3. Principles and Policies – 2.3.5. Voluntary Commitments  102-13  Membership of associations  2. Corticeira Amorim – 2.1. Organisational Profile – 2.1.4. Participation in Associations  Strategy and Analysis 102-14  Statement from senior decision-maker  Consolidated Annual Report 31-12-2018 – Chairman’s letter  102-15  Key impacts, risks, and opportunities  Consolidated Management Report – 14. Business Risks and Uncertainties  Ethics and Integrity 102-16  Values, principles, standards, and norms of behaviour  2. Corticeira Amorim – 2.2. People and Culture and 2.3. Principles and Policies  102-17  Mechanisms for advice and concerns about ethics  2. Corticeira Amorim – 2.3. Principles and Policies  Governance 102-18  Governance structure  3. Sustainability Management and Strategy – 3.1. Sustainability Management Structure | Corporate Governance Report – B. Corporate Boards and Committees, II. Management and Supervision, a) Composition  102-24  Nominating and selecting the highest governance body  Corporate Governance Report – B. Corporate Board and Committees  Stakeholder Engagement 102-40  List of stakeholder groups  3. Sustainability Management and Strategy – 3.2. Engagement with Stakeholders  102-41  Collective bargaining agreements  6. Promote People’s Development, Safety and Well-Being – 6.1. Training and Development – 6.1.2. Labour Relations  102-42  Identifying and selecting stakeholders  3. Sustainability Management and Strategy – 3.2. Engagement with Stakeholders – 3.2.1. Corticeira Amorim’s Stakeholders  102-43  Approach to stakeholder engagement  3. Sustainability Management and Strategy – 3.2. Engagement with Stakeholders – 3.2.2. Main Means of Communication  102-44  Key topics and concerns raised  3. Sustainability Management and Strategy – 3.2. Engagement with Stakeholders – 3.2.3. Consultation | 3.3. Sustainable Development Priorities  Report Profile 102-45  Entities included in the consolidated financial statements  1. About the Sustainability Report | 7. Methodological Notes – 7.1. Perimeter  102-46  Defining report content and topic Boundaries  1. About the Sustainability Report  102-47  List of material topics  1. About the Sustainability Report  102-48  Restatements of information  1. About the Sustainability Report | 7. Methodological Notes  102-49  Changes in reporting  1. About the Sustainability Report | 7. Methodological Notes – 7.1. Perimeter  102-50  Reporting period  1. About the Sustainability Report  102-51  Date of most recent report  Sustainability Report 2017, covering the years 2016 and 2017.  102-52  Reporting cycle  1. About the Sustainability Report  102-53  Contact point for questions regarding the report  1. About the Sustainability Report  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  161   GRI ref.  Description  Value / Location  102-54  Claims of reporting in accordance with the GRI Standards  1. About the Sustainability Report  102-55  GRI content index  Present table  102-56  External assurance  1. About the Sustainability Report  GRI 200 – ECONOMIC STANDARDS 2016 Material Aspect: 201 – Economic Performance 2016 1 – The material topics of Corticeira Amorim were based on the comparison of the results from stakeholders consultation with the  103 – Management Approach 2016  company’s internal perspective. In direct relation to economic performance, the topic “Economic Performance” was considered a topic with a high materiality (materiality matrix – 1. About the Sustainability Report). Generic Management Approach  2 – Corticeira Amorim has over the years promoted several initiatives related to economic performance (4. Promote R & D + I and Leverage Economic Performance). 3 – Corticeira Amorim performs the measurement and monitoring of the indicators associated with this aspect and reports them in this Report (4. Promote R & D + I and Leverage Economic Performance – 4.2. Economic Performance).  Direct economic value generated and distributed  4. Promote R & D + I and Leverage Economic Performance – 4.2. Economic Performance | 7. Methodological Notes – 7.1. Perimeter and 7.3. Economic Performance  201-2  Financial implications and other risks and opportunities due to climate change  Consolidated Management Report – 14. Business Risks and Uncertainties | Corporate Governance Report – C. Internal Organisation, III. Control and Risk Management | 4. Promote R & D + I and Leverage Economic Performance | 5. Promote the Environmental Features of the Product and the montado – 5.1. Promotion of the montado, Its Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services and 5.2. Energy Efficiency and Climate Change and 5.3. Product Environmental Impact and 5.4. Circular Economy  201-3  Defined benefit plan obligations and other retirement plans  4. Promote R & D + I and Leverage Economic Performance – 4.2. Economic Performance | 6. Promote People’s Development, Safety and Well-Being – 6.1. Training and Development – 6.1.2. Labour Relations  201-1  Aspect Gri 202 – Market Presence 2016 202-1  Ratios of standard entry level wage by gender compared to local minimum wage  6. Promote People’s Development, Safety and Well-Being – 6.1. Training and Development – 6.1.2. Labour Relations  Aspect Gri 204 – Procurement Practices 2016 204-1  Proportion of spending on local suppliers  2. Corticeira Amorim – 2.4. Supply Chain – 2.4.1. Procurement and Supply of Cork and 2.4.2. Procurement and Supply of Non-Cork Products  Aspect Gri 205 – Anti-Corruption 2016 205-1  Operations assessed for risks related to corruption  2. Corticeira Amorim – 2.3. Principles and Policies – 2.3.3. Corruption and Bribery  205-3  Confirmed incidents of corruption and actions taken  2. Corticeira Amorim – 2.3. Principles and Policies – 2.3.3. Corruption and Bribery  Material Aspect: Research, development and innovation  103 – Management Approach 2016  1 – The material topics of Corticeira Amorim were based on the comparison of the results from the stakeholders consultation with the company’s internal perspective. In direct relation to research, development and innovation, the topic “Research, Development and Innovation” was considered a topic with a high materiality (materiality matrix – 1. About the Sustainability Report). Generic Management Approach  2 – Corticeira Amorim has over the years promoted several initiatives relating to research, development and innovation (4. Promote R & D + I and Leverage Economic Performance). 3 – Corticeira Amorim performs the measurement and monitoring of the indicators associated with this aspect and reports them in this Report (4. Promote R & D + I and Leverage Economic Performance – 4.1 Research, Development and Innovation).  162  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .   GRI ref.  Description  Value / Location  Average annual investment  4. Promote R & D + I and Leverage Economic Performance – 4.1. Research, Development and Innovation  Submission of patents  4. Promote R & D + I and Leverage Economic Performance – 4.1. Research, Development and Innovation  GRI 300 – ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS 2016 Material Aspect: Gri 302 – Energy 2016  103 – Management Approach 2016  1 – The material topics of Corticeira Amorim were based on the comparison of the results from stakeholders consultation with the Company’s internal perspective. In direct relation to energy, the topic ”Energy Efficiency and Climate Change” was considered a topic with a high materiality (materiality matrix – 1. About the Sustainability Report). Generic Management Approach  2 – Corticeira Amorim has promoted over the years several initiatives related to energy consumption (5. Promote the Environmental Features of the Product and the montado). 3 – Corticeira Amorim performs the measurement and monitoring of the indicators associated with this aspect and reports them in this Report – 5.2. Energy Efficiency and Climate Change – 5.2.1. Energy – 5.2.2 Energy Intensity).  Specific Management Approach  Some Corticeira Amorim units are covered by regulations of the Management System of Intensive Energy Consumption (SGCIE)  302-1  Energy consumption within the organization  5. Promote the Environmental Features of the Product and the montado – 5.2. Energy Efficiency and Climate Change – 5.2.1. Energy | 7. Methodological Notes – 7.4. Energy Efficiency and Climate Change – Energy  302-2  Energy consumption outside of the organization  2. Corticeira Amorim – 2.4. Supply Chain – 2.4.3. Transport, Upstream and Downstream Activities in the Value Chain | 7. Methodological Notes – 7.2 Supply Chain – Upstream and Downstream Activities in the Value Chain  302-3  Energy intensity  5. Promote the Environmental Features of the Product and the montado – 5.2. Energy Efficiency and Climate Change – 5.2.2. Energy Intensity | 7. Methodological Notes – 7.6. Energy Efficiency and Climate Change | Energy Intensity and Carbon Intensity  302-4  Reduction of energy consumption  5. Promote the Environmental Features of the Product and the montado – 5.2. Energy Efficiency and Climate Change – 5.2.2. Energy Intensity  302-5  Reductions in energy requirements of products and services  5. Promote the Environmental Features of the Product and the montado – 5.2. Energy Efficiency and Climate Change – 5.2.1. Energy and 5.2.2. Energy Intensity  Material Aspect: Gri 303 – Water 2016 As product environmental impact management involves the “Water Management and Use” and “Product Quality and Responsibility” topics, these topics are considered material to respond to the GRI Standards 2016. For purposes of responding to Generic Management Approach 2016, the following paragraph should be considered:  103 – Management Approach 2016  Generic Management Approach  1 – The material topics of Corticeira Amorim were based on the comparison of the results from stakeholders consultation with the Company’s internal perspective. In direct relation to water, the topic “Product Environmental Impact” was considered a topic with a high materiality (materiality matrix – 1. About the Sustainability Report). 2 – Corticeira Amorim has over the years promoted several initiatives related to product environmental impact (5. Promote the Environmental Features of the Product and the montado). 3 – Corticeira Amorim performs the measurement and monitoring of the indicators associated with this aspect and reports them in this Report (5. Promote the Environmental Features of the Product and the montado – 5.3. Product Environmental Impact – 5.3.1. Water Management and Use – 5.3.2. Product Quality and Responsibility.  303-1  Water withdrawal by source  5. Promote the Environmental Features of the Product and the montado – 5.3. Product Environmental Impact – 5.3.1. Water Management and Use  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  163   GRI ref.  Description  Value / Location  Material Aspect: Gri 304 – Biodiversity 2016 1 – The material topics of Corticeira Amorim were based on the comparison of the results from stakeholders consultation with the Company’s internal perspective. With direct relation to biodiversity, the topic “Promotion of the montado, Its Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services “ was considered a topic with a high materiality (materiality matrix – 1. About the Sustainability Report).  103 – Management Approach 2016  Generic Management Approach  304-1  Operational sites owned, leased, managed in, or adjacent to, protected areas and areas of high biodiversity value outside protected areas  5. Promote the Environmental Features of the Product and the montado – 5.1. Promotion of the montado, Its Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services – 5.1.4. Location of Operations  Significant impacts of activities, products, and services on biodiversity  5. Promote the Environmental Features of the Product and the montado – 5.1. Promotion of the montado, Its Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services – 5.1.1. Increasing knowledge relating to the impact of cork products and the ecosystem they make viable and 5.1.2. Forestry Intervention Project and 5.1.3. Acquisition of the Herdade da Baliza estate  304-2  2 – Corticeira Amorim has promoted over the years several initiatives related to biodiversity (5. Promote the Environmental Features of the Product and the montado). 3 – Corticeira Amorim performs the measurement and monitoring of the indicators associated with this aspect and reports them in this Report (5. Promote the Environmental Features of the Product and the montado – 5.1. Promotion of the montado, Its Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services).  Material Aspect: Gri 305 – Emissions 2016  103 – Management Approach 2016  1 – The material topics of Corticeira Amorim were based on the comparison from stakeholders consultation with the Company’s internal perspective. In direct relation to emissions, the topic “Energy Efficiency and Climate Change” was considered a topic with a high materiality (materiality matrix – 1. About the Sustainability Report). Generic Management Approach  2 – Corticeira Amorim has promoted over the years several initiatives related to emissions (5. Promote the Environmental Features of the Product and the montado). 3 – Corticeira Amorim performs the measurement and monitoring of the indicators associated with this aspect and reports them in this Report (5. Promote the Environmental Features of the Product and the montado – 5.2. Energy Efficiency and Climate Change – 5.2.3. Emissions – 5.2.4. Carbon Intensity).  Specific Management Approach  Some Corticeira Amorim units are covered by regulations of the Management System of Intensive Energy Consumption (SGCIE)  305-1  Direct (Scope 1) GHG emissions  5. Promote the Environmental Features of the Product and the montado – 5.2. Energy Efficiency and Climate Change – 5.2.3. Emissions | 7. Methodological Notes – 7.5. Energy Efficiency and Climate Change – Emissions  305-2  Energy indirect (Scope 2) GHG emissions  5. Promote the Environmental Features of the Product and the montado – 5.2. Energy Efficiency and Climate Change – 5.2.3. Emissions | 7. Methodological Notes – 7.5. Energy Efficiency and Climate Change – Emissions  305-3  Other indirect (Scope 3) GHG emissions  2. Corticeira Amorim – 2.4. Supply Chain – 2.4.3. Transport, Upstream and Downstream Activities in the Value Chain | 7. Methodological Notes – 7.2. Supply Chain – Upstream and Downstream Activities in the Value Chain  305-4  GHG emissions intensity  5. Promote the Environmental Features of the Product and the montado – 5.2. Energy Efficiency and Climate Change – 5.2.4. Carbon Intensity | 7. Methodological Notes – 7.6. Energy Efficiency and Climate Change – Energy Intensity and Carbon Intensity  305-5  Reduction of GHG emissions  5. Promote the Environmental Features of the Product and the montado – 5.2. Energy Efficiency and Climate Change – 5.2.4. Carbon Intensity  164  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .   GRI ref.  Description  Value / Location  Material Aspect: Gri 306 – Effluents And Waste 2016 1 – The material topics of Corticeira Amorim were based on the comparison of the results from stakeholders consultation with the Company’s internal perspective. In direct relation to effluents and waste, the topic “Circular Economy” was considered a topic with a high materiality (materiality matrix – 1. About the Sustainability Report).  103 – Management Approach 2016  Generic Management Approach  306-2  Waste by type and disposal method  2 – Corticeira Amorim has promoted over the years several initiatives related to the management of effluents and waste (5. Promote the Environmental Features of the Product and the montado). 3 – Corticeira Amorim performs the measurement and monitoring of the indicators associated with this aspect and reports them in this Report (5. Promote the Environmental Features of the Product and the montado – 5.4. Circular Economy – 5.4.2. Waste and 5.4.1. Recycling of Cork). 5. Promote the Environmental Features of the Product and the montado – 5.4. Circular Economy – 5.4.2. Waste  Aspect: Gri 307 – Environmental Compliance 2016 307-1  Non-compliance with environmental laws and regulations  There are no fines or non-monetary penalties for non-compliance with environmental laws and regulations.  Aspect: Gri 308 – Supplier Environmental Assessment 2016 308-2  Negative environmental impacts in the supply chain and actions taken  2. Corticeira Amorim – 2.3. Principles and Policies and 2.4. Supply Chain  GRI 400 – SOCIAL STANDARDS 2016 Material Topic: Gri 401 – Employment 2016  103 – Management Approach 2016  1 – The material topics of Corticeira Amorim were based on the comparison of the results from stakeholders consultation with the Company’s internal perspective. In direct relation to employment, the topic “ Training and Development” was considered a topic with a high materiality (materiality matrix – 1. About the Sustainability Report). Generic Management Approach  3 – Corticeira Amorim performs the measurement and monitoring of the indicators associated with this aspect and reports them in this Report (6. Promote People’s Development, Safety and Well-Being – 6.1. Training and Development – 6.1.1. Employment).  Specific Management Approach  401-1  2 – Corticeira Amorim has promoted over the years several initiatives related to employment (6. Promote People’s Development, Safety and Well-Being).  New employee hires and employee turnover  The work performed in Corticeira Amorim ‘s supply chain takes place in compliance with institutional and legal structures. The working conditions in Corticeira Amorim ‘s supply chain meet the labour legislation in each geography where the activity is developed. 6. Promote People’s Development, Safety and Well-Being – 6.1. Training and Development – 6.1.1. Employment  Material Topic: Gri 402 – Labour / Management Relations 2016  103 – Management Approach 2016  1 – The material topics of Corticeira Amorim were based on the comparison of the results from stakeholders consultation with the Company’s internal perspective. In direct relation to labour relations, the topic “ Training and Development” was considered a topic of high materiality (materiality matrix – 1. About the Sustainability Report). Generic Management Approach  3 – Corticeira Amorim performs the measurement and monitoring of the indicators associated with this aspect and reports them in this Report (6. Promote People’s Development, Safety and Well-Being – 6.1 Training and Development – 6.1.2. Labour Relations).  Specific Management Approach  402-1  2 – Corticeira Amorim has promoted over the years several initiatives related to labour relations (6. Promote People’s Development, Safety and Well-Being).  Minimum notice periods regarding operational changes  The work performed in Corticeira Amorim ‘s supply chain takes place in compliance with institutional and legal structures. The working conditions in Corticeira Amorim ‘s supply chain meet the labour legislation in each geography where the activity is developed. Regulations concerning prior notice relating to the work location (in particular those that require subsequent amendment) complied with by Corticeira Amorim.  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  165   GRI ref.  Description  Value / Location  MATERIAL TOPIC: GRI 403 – OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY 2016  103 Management Approach 2016  1 – The material topics of Corticeira Amorim were based on the comparison of the results from stakeholders consultation with the Company’s internal perspective. In direct relation to health and safety at work, the topic “Health and Safety at Work” was considered a topic with a high materiality (materiality matrix – 1. About the Sustainability Report). Generic Management Approach  2 – Corticeira Amorim has promoted over the years several initiatives related to health and safety at work (6. Promote People’s Development, Safety and Well-Being). 3 – Corticeira Amorim performs the measurement and monitoring of the indicators associated with this aspect and reports them in this Report (6. Promote People’s Development, Safety and Well-Being – 6.2 Health and Safety at Work).  Specific Management Approach  The work performed in Corticeira Amorim ‘s supply chain takes place in compliance with institutional and legal structures. The working conditions in Corticeira Amorim ‘s supply chain meet the labour legislation in each geography where the activity is developed. 6. Promote People’s Development, Safety and Well-Being – 6.2 Health and Safety at Work | 7. Methodological Notes – 7.7. Health and Safety at Work Ratios of accidents, professional illnesses, lost days, and absenteeism, and number of work-related fatalities, by gender  403-2  Types of injury and rates of injury, occupational diseases, lost days, and absenteeism, and number of work-related fatalities  2018  2017  2016  Accident frequency index Female Male Accident frequency index Female Male Work-related illness rate Female Male Lost working days rate Female Male Absenteeism rate Female Male  115 9 106 20.9 6.7 25.4 7.1 10.5 6.0 737 433 800 3.7% 4.8% 3.3%  130 21 109 21.1 14.3 23.2 1.6 0.0 2.1 547 304 623 3.4% 4.3% 3.1%  159 32 127 26.9 22.1 28.4 1.2 0.7 1.3 583 486 614 3.3% 3.9% 3.1%  **  ***  ** Changing criteria for the certification of occupational disease, as well as validation of several cases pending from previous years *** Change in the calculation according to the methodological notes Number of injury and work-related fatalities, for all workers (excluding employees) whose work, or workplace, is controlled by the organization, by gender Number of accidents in the workplace Female Male Number of fatalities Female Male  166  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP O RT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MO RIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .  2018  2017  26 2 24 0 0 0  13 0 13 0 0 0   GRI ref.  Description  Value / Location  Material Aspect: Gri 404 – Training And Education 2016  103 – Management Approach 2016  1 – The material topics of Corticeira Amorim were based on the comparison of the results of the stakeholders consultation with the Company’s internal perspective. In direct relation to training and education, the topic “ Training and Development” was considered a topic with a high materiality (materiality matrix – 1. About the Sustainability Report). Generic Management Approach  2 – Corticeira Amorim has promoted through the years several initiatives related to training and education (6. Promote People’s Development, Safety and Well-Being). 3 – Corticeira Amorim performs the measurement and monitoring of the indicators associated with this aspect and reports them in this Report (6. Promote People’s Development, Safety and Well-Being – 6.1. Training and Development – 6.1.3. Training and Education).  404-1  Average hours of training per year per employee  6. Promote People’s Development, Safety and Well-Being – 6.1. Training and Development – 6.1.3. Training and Education  Material Topic: Gri 405 – Diversity And Equal Opportunity 2016  103 – Management Approach 2016  1 – The material topics of Corticeira Amorim were based on the comparison of the results from stakeholders consultation with the Company’s internal perspective. In direct relation to diversity and equal opportunities, the topic “ Training and Development” was considered a topic with a high materiality (materiality matrix – 1. About the Sustainability Report). Generic Management Approach  2 – Corticeira Amorim has promoted over the years several initiatives related to diversity and equal opportunities (6. Promote People’s Development, Safety and Well-Being). 3 – Corticeira Amorim performs the measurement and monitoring of the indicators associated with this aspect and reports them in this Report (6. Promote People’s Development, Safety and Well-Being – 6.1. Training and Development – 6.1.4. Diversity and Equal Opportunities and Non-Discrimination).  Specific Management Approach  Corticeira Amorim advocates a policy of management and motivation of people that promotes non-discrimination of any kind, equal opportunities in recruitment, promotion and training of employees, remuneration and working conditions.  405-1  Diversity of governance bodies and employees  6. Promote People’s Development, Safety and Well-Being – 6.1. Training and Development – 6.1.1. Employment and 6.1.4. Diversity and Equal Opportunities and Non-Discrimination  405-2  Ratio of basic salary and remuneration of women to men  6. Promote People’s Development, Safety and Well-Being – 6.1. Training and Development – 6.1.4. Diversity and Equal Opportunities and Non-Discrimination  Aspect: Gri 413 – Local Communities 2016 413-1  Operations with local community engagement, impact assessments, and development programs  6. Promote People’s Development, Safety and Well-Being – 6.3. Impact on the Local Community  Aspect: Gri 414 – Supplier Social Assessments 2016 414-2  Negative social impacts in the supply chain and actions taken  2. Corticeira Amorim – 2.3. Principles and Policies and 2.4. Supply Chain  Mozelos, 15 February 2019 The Board of Directors of Corticeira Amorim, S.G.P.S., S.A.  SUSTAINA BILIT Y REP O RT —  167   9  INDEPENDENT VERIFICATION REPORT  168  — ANNUAL CONSOLIDATED REP ORT ‘18 CORTICEIR A A MORIM , S.G.P.S., S. A .   SUSTAINABILIT Y REP ORT —  169    