 Annual Review 2010
   CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11
  
 Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Annual Review 2010
Syngenta is one of the world’s leading companies with more than 26,000 employees in over 90 countries dedicated to our purpose: Bringing plant potential to life. With our innovation in Crop Protection and Seeds, we contribute to addressing global challenges.
Contents
Overview
Contributing to food security
Our offer
Addressing growers’ needs
Creating our offer
Governance and financials
i Strategic imperatives
ii Group performance
01 Business highlights
02 Chairman’s letter
04 Chief Executive Officer’s letter
07 A global challenge
08 Sustainable production systems for agriculture
09 Grow more from less
10 Better solutions for the farmer of the future
11 Increasing resource efficiency
12 Strengthening rural economies
14 Integrated solutions for today’s farmer
17 Corn
19 Soybean
20 Cereals
21 Rice
22 Sugar cane
23 Oilseeds and sugar beet
24 Vegetables
25 Lawn and Garden
27 Research and Development
30 People
32 Operations
35 Crop Protection product line performance
37 Seeds product line performance
38 Board of Directors
40 Executive Committee
42 Financial information
50 Corporate Responsibility performance summary 54 Shareholder information
                                           CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

  i
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Strategic imperatives
Creating superior value for our customers
Integrate
We are bringing together our world leading Crop Protection portfolio and our broad Seeds platform to develop a fully integrated offer on a global crop basis.
Innovate
We will harness our knowledge of agriculture and our understanding of growers to deliver game-changing technologies which will drive land productivity.
Outperform
Our aim is to gain market share across our combined businesses and to create value for our shareholders by first creating value for our customers.
Engagement
We aim to create shared value for
all our stakeholders through fostering partnerships and open dialogue.
Business ethics
Our code of conduct commits us to maintain high ethical standards in all business practices, and we promote a culture of transparency.
Health, safety and environment
We are committed to the highest safety and environmental standards for the production, handling and disposal of our products, and we support our business partners in adopting comparable standards.
      Read more about our strategy in the Chief Executive Officer’s letter on page 4
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Group performance
and delivering strong performance
   Group sales1
$11.6bn
Earnings per share3
Crop Protection sales1,2
Seeds sales1
$2.8bn
Dividend per share5
   2010
11.64
10.99 11.62
+4% (CER)
16.44
16.15 16.40
$8.9bn
Free cash flow4
8.88
8.49 9.23
+3% (CER)
1,129
528 729
2.80
2.56 2.44
+8% (CER)
7.00
6.00 6.00
2010
2010
   2009
2009
2009
   2008
2008
2008
       2010
 2009
 2008
  $16.44 +2% Number of farmers trained
$1,129m +114% Nationalities in senior management
CHF7.00 +17%
2010
  2009
2009
  2008
2010
2008
       2010
4.3m
CO2e emissions
4.3
3.9 2.4
0.66
0.76 0.75
24
Illness and injury rate6
0.39
24
24 22
0.39
0.42 0.50
2010
  2009
2009
  2008
2008
      2010
0.66
CO2e kg /$EBIT
1 Growth at constant exchange rates (CER)
2 Including inter-segment sales
3 Fully diluted excluding restructuring
and impairment
4 For a definition of free cash flow see page 48
5 Subject to shareholder approval at the Annual
General Meeting on April 19, 2011
6 Recordable injury and illness rate (IIR) per
2010
  2009
2009
  2008
2008
  200,000 hours according to US OHSA definition
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Business highlights
   Advancing solutions for Brazilian growers
In April, Syngenta entered into a long-term multi-crop partnership with Embrapa, the Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation, to advance solutions for Brazilian growers to improve crop quality and yield. The initial focus will be on corn, cotton and soybean.
Isopyrazam – next generation fungicide
Isopyrazam was launched on barley in the UK in March and on wheat in New Zealand in July. It is the first in
a new class of next generation fungicides and sets new standards of disease control and yield response.
Breakthrough corn trait technology
AGRISURE VIPTERATM, with a new mode of action for broad spectrum insect control, was launched in the USA in time for the 2011 growing season. Field trials of trait stacks containing AGRISURE VIPTERATM showed a clear advantage over competing products.
Substantial dividend increase
In 2010 the company generated record free cash flow of $1.1 billion. We are proposing a 17 percent increase in the dividend, from CHF6.00 to CHF7.00.
Record sales of AMISTAR®
In May we opened new capacity for azoxystrobin, the active ingredient used in our leading fungicide AMISTAR®. Immediate demand for the increased production was reflected in sales growth for the year of 20 percent (CER).
Sustainable Agroecosystems professorship
Syngenta announced in November that it will donate CHF 10 million to the ETH Zürich Foundation to finance a new professorship and associated research staff. The professorship aims to advance science, education and public dialogue related to sustainable agriculture and food security.
Syngenta celebrates 10 years
CEO Mike Mack rang the closing bell on Wall Street on November 12 to celebrate the anniversary of Syngenta’s creation and of the Company’s first listing on the New York Stock Exchange. Over the last 10 years, Syngenta has become one of the world’s leading companies with
a fivefold increase in market capitalization.
Syngenta Photo Prize 2010
The Syngenta Photo Prize 2010 competition recognized outstanding photography with the theme “Bringing plant potential to life”. Winners from around the world were announced on November 16 at a special exhibition in Basel, Switzerland.
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
 01
         CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Chairman’s letter 02
Meeting the
As the dust settled after the financial crisis of 2009,
it became clear that the economic center of gravity had shifted markedly to the so-called developing countries of Latin America and Asia. The acceleration of this long-term, structural change was particularly notable in agriculture where growth in emerging markets significantly outpaced the advanced markets of North America and Western Europe. Syngenta was extremely well placed to capture these growth opportunities and capitalized on the investments made in these regions over the past few years.
 challenge
The inexorable growth in productivity, population
and prosperity in these countries led, in part, to
the upward pressure on global commodity prices, including staple food crops. In addition, drought in Russia led to an export ban on wheat which propelled the price significantly higher in the second half of
“The central facts are these: every year the planet has 80 million more mouths to feed; population growth is overwhelmingly in the emerging markets; and by 2050 over 70 percent of the world’s population will live in urban areas.”
the year. Supply concerns in corn and soybean compounded the problem such that grain prices ended the year some 50 percent higher than they were at the end of 2009. This, once again, caused concern amongst policy makers and other stakeholders and reignited the debate about global food security.
The central facts are these: every year the planet has 80 million more mouths to feed; population growth
is overwhelmingly in the emerging markets; and by 2050 over 70 percent of the world’s population will live in urban areas. The one variable that will not grow, however, is the planet’s natural resources – these are finite and in some cases actually shrinking. The key question, therefore, is how to address this apparently insoluble problem?
The answer lies in innovation and collaboration. Innovation in bringing new technologies and business models to life, and collaboration between each member of the food value chain to bring their skills, resources and capabilities to tackle the problem. At Syngenta, we believe our unique contribution lies in innovation through integrating our technologies. By doing so we believe we can discover products that have the attributes of enhancing calories produced per acre; protecting and maximizing the earth’s natural resources and ensuring that rural communities remain vibrant and economically viable.
12
1. 2.
  Speaking at the UNCTAD World Investment Forum in Xiamen, China, on September 7, 2010, involving global leaders from many countries around the world.
Touring field trials carried out by the Pathumthani Rice Research Center. The Syngenta team in Thailand cooperates closely with
the Department of Rice on rice productivity.
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

    3
At a Flowers exhibition in the young plant production facility in De Lier, The Netherlands.
4
Visiting a retailer of Syngenta products in the Fujian Province, China. The retailers are the vital link between the local Syngenta teams and the growers.
3. 4.
This is an integrated approach from which we are already seeing tangible results. In Brazil, for example, our new solution for sugar cane growers, PLENETM, will fundamentally change how this crop is planted, grown and harvested. With greatly enhanced yield, lower water usage and better carbon sequestration PLENETM ensures a more productive and sustainable crop. In addition, through a partnership with industry association, Unica, we are helping to provide new, safer and better job opportunities for the workers who previously toiled in the field in hot and dangerous conditions.
That partnership was one of many that we forged during 2010 in order to find novel ways to address
the many challenges of providing food security. Also
in Brazil, we signed a ground-breaking agreement with Embrapa, the national agricultural research corporation to share technologies in corn, soybean and cotton
and ensure access to growers both large and small.
In April, we signed a public-private partnership with the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT) to develop and enhance technology in wheat. In Asia, we strengthened our partnership with the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) in order to develop the potential of rice across the region. Finally, in November, we announced a 10-year collaboration with ETH Zurich to fund research into sustainable agroecosystems. These agreements point the way to our increasingly crop and grower-focused approach to our business, as you see reflected in this year’s report.
On my visits this year around the world to see our customers I learned more about the increasingly complex challenges that they face. My discussions with them, and also with many Syngenta employees, underpinned my confidence that the Company is uniquely placed to offer growers differentiated products and solutions that address their challenges both today and in the future.
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
03
As well as speaking to our customers, I also met
with numerous other stakeholders around the world. The contribution that Syngenta makes is increasingly recognized and our standing and reputation continues to grow. Our collective reputation rests with the individual actions and conduct of the more than 26,000 employees around the world. Throughout 2010, our revised Code of Conduct was further embedded in the organization. Compliance with this code, in addition to all aspects of legal, ethical, societal and environmental matters is overseen by the Corporate Responsibility Committee of the Board. Ensuring the protection of the Company’s economic, physical and reputational assets, along with oversight of the strategic direction and financial performance of the Company comprise the primary focal points of the Board of Directors. I am indebted to my Board colleagues for the diligence and enthusiasm with which they discharged their duties throughout the year.
2010 marked the tenth anniversary of Syngenta.
The Company has achieved a great deal in those years. As we look into the future, agriculture has never been more central to the world’s social, political and economic development. The production of sufficient affordable, high quality food is not a given and is reliant upon innovation. The production of this food in a more sustainable way will require innovation, collaboration and a new, holistic way of looking at value creation.
I am pleased to say that Syngenta is at the forefront
of these developments and is well placed to be highly successful for the next 10 years of its life.
Martin Taylor
Chairman
  CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Chief Executive Officer’s letter 04
Integrating our offer
Syngenta’s results for 2010 illustrate the transformation in the scale of the Company since its creation ten years ago. Sales of $11.6 billion are 84 percent higher and earnings per share of $16.44 compared with $2.20 in 2001. While agricultural markets have certainly expanded over the period, these figures also reflect steady gains in market share and an outstanding record of innovation. In addition, continuing focus on operational efficiency has increased profitability while creating the headroom for investments in strategic growth areas. Most notably we have expanded our presence in the emerging markets, which now account for almost 50 percent of sales.
Emerging markets were the main driver of our Crop Protection business in 2010, enabling us to achieve growth in sales over the previous year. We achieved this in the face of a highly competitive pricing environment, notably in North America, which led to a reduction in group earnings in the first half. This was offset by higher operating income in the second half, with rapid growth in the emerging markets of Asia Pacific and strong demand in the main season in Latin America.
In Latin America, we have been attentive to multiple opportunities across crops in the many countries of the region, while maintaining our leading position for soybean in the key Brazilian market. This reflects the success of PRIORI XTRA®, based on our world leading fungicide AMISTAR®. Global sales of AMISTAR® reached $1.2 billion in 2010 with growth
of 20 percent (CER) on the previous year, demonstrating the excellence in product development which enables us to maximize product lifecycles and to maintain high margins on blockbuster products. The opening of new capacity for AMISTAR® at Grangemouth,
 “The path Syngenta is now pursuing recognizes the imperative of yield gain but also goes beyond it, to encompass all the resources involved in achieving global food security.”
1.
2.
  3.
4.
   CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 1
In discussion with Marc Hillard, Transformation Manager, at
a special exhibition in Basel that marked the completion
of Syngenta’s capacity expansion program.
2
Andrés Álvarez, Marketing Manager Andean, Caribbean & Central America discusses coffee growing at La Holanda plantation in Colombia.
3
Examining the roots of a rice plant with Huynh Van Thon, Chairman of AGPPS (An Giang Plant Protection Service), Vietnam’s largest distributor.
4
Looking at the different seed treatment offerings for Flowers and Vegetable seeds in Enkhuizen, The Netherlands.
Scotland, in May underpins our expectation of further substantial growth in the coming years.
Seeds registered broad-based growth across all product lines and all regions. Vegetables and Diverse Field Crops continued to show steady underlying growth, supplemented by acquisitions in sugar beet and sunflower. Industry-leading profitability in both these product lines is testimony to the depth and variety of our germplasm pools and to our breeding expertise. These strengths are also becoming increasingly apparent in the performance of Corn & Soybean: in the USA, field trials showed that the diversity of our corn genetics is now producing yield outperformance against major competitors. Our triple stack corn seed reached market penetration levels in 2010 and will be complemented in the 2011 season by the new trait AGRISURE VIPTERATM, which delivers unrivalled broad lepidoptera control. The advances
in our portfolio are reflected in a further marked improvement in Seeds profitability in 2010.
The progress made by Seeds, in both financial and portfolio terms, gives further impetus to the new commercial direction we are now formally implementing worldwide. This strategy is founded on three core objectives: Integrate, Innovate and Outperform. Our aim is to bring together Crop Protection and Seeds
to develop a fully integrated offer on a global crop basis. A first step will be the merging of commercial operations globally over the next two years, building on models already successfully introduced in our second largest market Brazil as well as in a number of smaller countries. The commercial integration will be overseen on a regional basis by our two Chief Operating Officers, who will each have cross-business executive responsibility for two regions: John Atkin for Europe, Africa and the Middle East and Latin America, and Davor Pisk for North America and Asia Pacific. John and Davor will continue to guide the Crop Protection and Seeds businesses respectively. They will also each have global strategic responsibility for four of the eight major crops in which we will be focusing our investments over the coming years. We shall at the same time be investing in our people, to ensure that we maximize the wealth of experience and talent which gives us a unique capability to address the increasing complexity of the challenges facing farmers.
We define innovation in the broadest sense, signifying new markets and ways of reaching customers as well as new products. Continuing investment in Research and Development is inherent in our company purpose of Bringing plant potential to life and will play a key role in the delivery of integrated technologies. We are establishing common R&D platforms based on the understanding of plants which informs both chemical and biological solutions. We will increase the return on R&D through value-adding partnerships and collaborations, such as the agreement with CIMMYT signed in April which has as an objective the combination of crop protection and seeds to enhance plant performance in wheat. Breakthroughs in the realization of innovative integrated offers include the
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
launch of PLENETM on sugar cane in Brazil and the development of an integrated rice seedling offer in Asia.
Our aim is to outperform in both operational and financial terms. We believe that the creation of unique solutions to meet grower needs will lead to sustained market share growth across the business. We will measure financial performance by targeting Cash Flow Return on Investment in excess of 12 percent and a group EBITDA margin in the range of 22 to 24 percent by 2015. We will target a continuous increase in the dividend with the new higher payout in 2011 as the starting point.
Syngenta’s new commercial strategy is actually the culmination of plans and initiatives that have been underway in the Company for some time. Over the last 12 months I have visited operations in many parts of the world and have witnessed both the potency of
our portfolio and the energy of our people in bringing a crop-based offer to market. Examples range from new technologies for coffee growers in Colombia to integrated solutions for vegetables in Vietnam. We are taking the concept of customer relationships to a new level, by systematically thinking like a grower as he considers the increasingly complex set of decisions relating to his crop inputs and how best to integrate them on the farm to maximize his investment. It is by imbuing our entire organization with this mindset that we will create competitive advantage in the future.
The path Syngenta is now pursuing recognizes the imperative of yield gain but also goes beyond it, to encompass all the resources involved in achieving global food security. A recent study by the World Business Council for Sustainable Development, which I had the honor of co-chairing, looked at the economic and resource challenges of sustaining a world population of 9 billion in 2050. To enable this number of people to live well and within the limits of the planet, agriculture must achieve a doubling of world food production while conserving water and energy. This can only happen through a holistic and long-term vision of the way we grow crops. Syngenta is already deploying
an array of tools and expertise to help make this vision a reality.
On behalf of the Board and the Executive Committee, I would like to thank all our employees for making Syngenta what it is today and for bringing the Company to this exciting stage of its development.
I know that I can count on their energy, enthusiasm and dedication as we work together to forge a meaningful contribution to the development of agriculture worldwide.
Michael Mack
Chief Executive Officer
05
   CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

  Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
06 Contributing to food security
  CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Scarcity of water, energy and land is expected to define food production in the coming decades. This will increase the existing pressure on farmers, who are working to meet the world’s needs for food, fuel and fiber. Demand for food has long exceeded supply in some regions. Every day, almost 1 billion people go
to bed hungry. With the global population expected to reach 9 billion by 2050, this figure could rise if action is not taken.
A global challenge
“People used the equivalent of 1.5 planets in 2007 to support their activities.”
The Living Planet Report 2010
World Wildlife Fund (WWF)
The World Food Summit of 1996 defined that food security exists “when all people, at all times have access to sufficient, safe, nutritious and affordable food to maintain a healthy and active life.” To make this happen, farmers will need to achieve at least a 70 percent increase in food production by 20501.
The journey to food security won’t be easy. Drivers of food insecurity range from environmental stress and natural disasters to political and trade issues. The megatrends of growing population, greater affluence and urbanization mean that more people want greater amounts of better quality food.
Yet while demand for food is growing, farmers’ ability to increase productivity is challenged as never before. In the coming years, they will have to deal with a
climate that is changing more rapidly; in many areas, this will mean higher temperatures and erratic weather patterns. They will have to contend with limited availability of land and water – already agriculture uses 40 percent of the world’s land surface and 70 percent of all available fresh water2. And their agricultural practices will need to protect biodiversity through increasing productivity without further expanding into natural ecosystems.
While great strides have been made, many regions fall short of producing their full potential of local crops, and this agricultural yield gap must be closed to achieve food security. Worldwide, this represents nearly 500 million farms of 2 hectares or less, supporting over 2 billion people. Increasing productivity in these areas is vital to reaching
food security.
Although the challenges ahead are daunting, they are by no means insurmountable. Agriculture has a major role to play in opening the way for food security while protecting precious natural resources and contributing to rural economic growth.
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
07
  1 FAO, “How to feed the world in 2050”
2 UNESCO
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

   08
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Contributing to food security
Sustainable production systems for agriculture
In February 2010, Syngenta collaborated with 29 other businesses and the World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD) to launch “Vision 2050: The new agenda for business.” This study lays out a pathway leading to a global population of some 9 billion people living well and within the resource limits of the planet by 2050. We are contributing to making this vision a reality by helping farmers produce enough food for a growing population.
Syngenta takes a system-wide approach to sustainable agriculture that focuses on the links between technology, land and people. Strong rural economies are the keystone of the sustainable agricultural system and fundamental to achieving food security. Our technology – combined with supporting infrastructure, access to markets and financial resources – enables better solutions for farmers so they can increase productivity and improve farm profitability. At the same time, our agricultural solutions can have a beneficial impact on water, land and biodiversity by allowing more efficient use of basic natural resources.
Thus, agricultural technologies enable a sustainable production system that protects the long-term economic and environmental viability of farming. Farmers can earn better incomes, live better lives and become stewards of the land.
 Find out more   www.syngenta.com/ar2010
Preserving the environment
through agriculture
Lucas do Rio Verde, a major agricultural city of Brazil’s Mato Grosso, is an area historically affected by deforestation.
In 2007, Syngenta, its distributor Fiagril and other partners co-created Lucas do Rio Verde Legal to raise awareness among local governments, farmer associations and the broader population that it was possible to grow and produce without violating the state’s forestry and labor legislation codes.
Results were so positive that the state government of Mato Grosso has since expanded the project to all other municipalities, and the federal government has created a similar initiative.
“Our region is a major soybean producer, so implementing a model for environmental conservation wasn’t an easy journey. However, it turned out to be an overwhelmingly positive experience as we had so many partners supporting us.”
Marcos Castro
Regional Sales Manager at Syngenta
Featured above: Marcos Castro (left); Marino Franz, Mayor of Lucas do Rio Verde municipality and owner of Fiagril (middle); and Ivanor Cella, farmer and Syngenta customer (right).
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Grow more from less
09
Syngenta Annual Review 2010
    Syngenta believes that farmers can produce enough
to meet the world’s needs for food, fuel and fiber
and safeguard the only planet we have for future generations – if we take a system-wide approach
that links technology, land and people. These
three elements build the foundation for a
sustainable production system in which
Better solutions technology enables better solutions for
farmers to increase productivity and
profitability, to increase resource
efficiency, and help reach food security.
Resource efficiency
  Better solutions
Choices on the farm
To ensure that farms meet their productivity potential, we need enabling and transparent regulations, to make safe technologies available to farmers.
Accelerating innovation
We need mechanisms to share innovation; protecting intellectual property helps stimulate research and development.
Sharing knowledge
Agriculture is based on knowledge supported by science; we need new partnerships to raise agronomy skills and share expertise.
Technology
People Land
Rural economies
Resource efficiency
Preserving the land
We need to increase productivity on existing farmland.
High stakes for water
Forty percent of water used for agriculture is wasted; we need solutions that increase water efficiency.
Vitality of biodiversity
Biodiversity and agriculture depend on each other; we need to protect the diversity of nature to secure our food supply and quality of life.
Rural economies
Building markets
Growing is not enough; farmers need supporting infrastructure and access to markets, finance and information.
Valuing farm work
Rural economies carry the weight of feeding the world; farming needs to be worthwhile and profitable.
Community development
We need agriculture to spur socio-economic development of rural communities.
          CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Contributing to food security 10
Better solutions for the farmer of the future
“The task of increasing food availability through production on a constant area of land with reduced inputs is such an enormous challenge that no useful approach or technology
can be ignored.”
Reaping the benefits: science and the sustainable intensification of global agriculture, 2009
The Royal Society
Syngenta values farm work – we see the people in rural communities as our business partners. As with any business, farmers must have the skills and tools
to prosper. Our contribution goes beyond providing technologies: we offer advanced, integrated solutions for the challenges facing farmers today and in the future. To achieve the best yields under their specific conditions, farmers must use high quality seeds, water efficient technologies, nutrients, insect and weed management, and soil conservation.
These solutions help farmers meet the needs of their customers and successfully compete in global and local markets. Consumers all over the world are not only demanding more food, but a greater variety including meat, dairy, and higher quality fruits and vegetables. Syngenta’s training programs enable farmers to boost yields sustainably, improve quality of produce, and enhance their livelihoods.
In India, for example, Syngenta has established a “crop health center,” called Krishi Shakti, which provides agronomy advice and resources to farmers from surrounding villages. In parallel, Syngenta started operating Krishi Shakti vans to support farmers on their farms. These programs provide crop diagnostics, soil testing, library facilities, training and education, demonstration plots and interactions with scientists. As a result, member farmers use Syngenta products and have increased yields and quality of their crops.
In another example, our PLENETM technology, being launched in 2011, addresses challenges in the sugar cane industry in Brazil. With this innovative technology, sugar cane segments are treated with seed care applications to protect them in early growth stages. Since mechanized planting is faster and safer with new technology developed in conjunction with leading equipment manufacturer John Deere, growers can harvest and replant their fields more frequently. This eliminates the typical yield degradation of the crop and increases overall productivity, leading to a yield gain of up to 15 percent.
   Find out more
Demonstrating value to
smallholder rice farmers
In China, 100 million farmers grow the rice that is a staple for 1.3 billion people, yet almost all of them are smallholders. Demonstrating the value of properly used Syngenta solutions to these growers has not been easy in the past.
To show farmers how to reduce the use of pesticides while increasing yields, the company’s local Crop Protection team began collaborating with China’s National Agro-Tech Extension Center (NATESC).
Farmers in each of the 10 major rice production provinces were recruited and trained on how to calibrate equipment, when to spray, and how to use Syngenta products that require fewer applications – such as VIRTAKO® and ARMURE®.
Now three years old, the program has shown that farmers can grow more using 50 percent less pesticide, and generating an additional $300 in yield per hectare on average.
Chinese growers and government agencies have taken notice. Syngenta
not only increased market share, but
also was honored in 2010 with a prize for Outstanding Corporate Social Responsibility Performance, from the China Association of Enterprises with Foreign Investment and the China Charity Federation.
www.syngenta.com/ar2010
“I’ve never seen a pesticide rate reduction technology generate this level of excitement and enthusiasm among farmers. The benefit of this program is obvious. I am very proud to promote it.”
Prof. Ducai Liu
Syngenta Technical Manager, Yangtzu Business Unit, China
Featured above: Prof. Ducai Liu (left) and Diyun Liang, Ministry of Agriculture.
  CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

   Operation PollinatorTM
13
Countries in which the program is already running.
Increasing resource efficiency
Syngenta recognizes that better solutions will not only address the need for increased productivity,
but will also help farmers to manage and protect the environment: sustainable, intensive farming improves resource efficiency.
A recent study by Stanford University found that an area of land larger than Russia has been saved from cultivation because farmers in many parts of the world have used modern technology to grow more on their farms in the last 50 years1. In Brazil, for instance, the rate of Amazon deforestation plunged to a historic low in 2009 – nearly 75 percent below its 2004 peak – while productivity increased faster than in any other country in the world2. Such productivity gains must continue, if we are to feed the world without increasing the area of cultivated land.
As fewer virgin areas are cultivated, the biodiversity
of natural ecosystems is saved from habitat loss. Protecting biodiversity is not only important for the wellbeing of the planet, but also vital to healthy and productive agriculture. This includes crop pollination, healthy soil, water and air purification, and the genetic diversity of wild plants.
Syngenta proactively initiates programs to protect biodiversity around farms. For example, Operation PollinatorTM3 workswithfarmerstocreatefarmborders of wild flora for pollinating insects, that depend on nectar and pollen for healthy diets. The results show
a substantial increase in valuable pollinators, including bees. The program is already running in 13 countries, and is a good example of how good farming practices conserve the environment.
Conserving water
Fresh water is critical to productive agriculture; it must be protected and used more efficiently. Yet, up to
40 percent of the fresh water used in agriculture is wasted. A recent study by the 2030 Water Resources Group4 found that existing agricultural technology can sustainably increase water use efficiency, at reasonable cost and with little investment.
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Syngenta’s integrated solutions help farmers produce 11 the highest yield from water used. These solutions
include improved seeds and crop protection products.
For example, in 2011 we will be the first company to
market corn hybrids that use available moisture more efficiently, giving higher yields on drought stressed acres. These hybrids also have the potential to reduce water use in irrigated farming and protect plants during unexpected drought.
Herbicides that control weeds and lower the need for tillage provide another way to save water. No- or low-till farming improves the soil’s ability to absorb water and reduces moisture loss. As a result, soil is protected against erosion and water runoff. Stopping runoff
also prevents agricultural chemicals and soil in fields from polluting rivers and streams.
Protecting resources
Another way to save natural resources is to prevent crop loss due to inadequate crop protection. Up to 50 percent of crops are lost in many parts of the world because of weeds, insects, fungi and spoilage. Syngenta products reduce crop loss on the field and after harvesting which, in turn, protects against the waste of water and energy, and loss of income.
Syngenta has also implemented programs that directly help preserve the environment. In southwestern Columbia, for example, the Ecoaguas initiative focuses on preserving important watersheds. It aims to regulate the water cycle through planting indigenous trees grown by community nurseries. Over the last
16 years, more than 760,000 trees have been planted, and training has promoted environmental awareness and good farming practices.
1 Greenhouse gas mitigation by agricultural intensification. Proceedings of the National Academies of Science (2009)
2 Tollefson J, The global farm. Nature, 466, 554-556, (2010)
3 www.operationpollinator.com
4 Charting our water future (2009)
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Contributing to food security
12
In developed countries, rural communities have made great strides in productivity. The journey to achieve sustainable increases in productivity continues in the emerging economies, but this is hindered by lack of access to modern technologies, knowledge sharing, financing and markets.
Bringing modern technologies to farmers
Often farmers are unable or unwilling to invest in the technologies they need to increase productivity. Smallholders face the constant risk that investment in better seeds and fertilizer will be lost if drought, flooding or disease destroy their crops and wipe out the benefits of their purchase.
But as a result of not using the best inputs, yields remain far below their potential. To overcome this problem, the Syngenta Foundation for Sustainable Agriculture (SFSA) offers creative financial solutions designed to reduce the risk for farmers investing in sustainable increases in productivity. For instance, the Agriculture Index Insurance Initiative launched in 2008 in Kenya aims to develop the potential of micro- insurance for smallholders. The Syngenta-subsidized Kilimo Salama program – “safe farming” in Kiswahili – allows smallholders to insure selected farm inputs
at their local retailer and pay half the premium. If there is insufficient rainfall as reported by automated weather stations, then farmers are compensated for their investment.
Syngenta Foundation for
Sustainable Agriculture
The Syngenta Foundation for Sustainable Agriculture (SFSA) creates value for smallholders in developing countries. Through collaborations with local partners, including government institutions, private companies and non-governmental organizations (NGOs), SFSA provides innovations required for sustainable agriculture and eases access to markets.
The Foundation currently runs projects in Africa, Asia and Latin America, and it contributes worldwide to the public debate on agricultural development.
In 2010, SFSA started its first projects in Indonesia and Vietnam, which focus on improving farmers’ livelihoods through extra cash crops. It piloted a project with smallholders in the Peruvian Andes, partnering with
an NGO and the regional division of McDonald’s. And it invested in the World Bank’s BioCarbon Fund, which buys carbon credits in developing countries.
As well as piloting new activities, SFSA also places strong emphasis on successful scale-up. In India, it continued its rapid expansion of agricultural extension. The aim is to reach 200,000 farmers by 2014, up from some 30,000 at the start of 2010. In Kenya, SFSA scaled up its weather index insurance from 200 smallholders in 2009 to about 12,000 in 2010. The creation and rapid uptake of this insurance have only been possible due to the SFSA’s catalytic lead. Pictured left: Njeri Muriuki registering a farmer’s drought insurance through her SFSA-enabled cellular phone.
Find out more www.syngentafoundation.org
Strengthening rural economies
“Only with sustainable intensification of crop production can serious progress be made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals on hunger and poverty reduction and
on ensuring environmental sustainability.”
Shivaji Pandey
Director, FAO’s Plant Production and Protection Division, keynote speech at the IVth World Congress on Conservation Agriculture in New Delhi, 2009
When rural communities can sustainably grow more from less and profitably sell their crops, they can live more prosperous lives. But this isn’t easy considering the challenges they face. Erratic weather, insects, disease and weeds can ruin crops and diminish incomes. Farmers must also deal with the risks of
a volatile market – even with a good crop, prices may be low.
Syngenta recognizes that the world’s farmers need more tailored, integrated solutions to make agriculture an economically viable and rewarding way of life.
     CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Camcoa300TM inCameroon
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
13
   Average subscription
$0.50
Weekly cost paid by smallholders in India to receive timely crop information on pest and disease management.
Creative knowledge sharing
Getting information regularly to the farmers who need it requires creative solutions. For instance, we address the need for knowledge sharing on a regular basis, over large and often remote areas in India, through a partnership with Nokia Life Tools. This partnership has led to an easy-to-use application for cell phones that gives growers access to timely, crop-specific tips on pest and disease management. Farmers subscribe
to the service for a nominal cost of around $0.50 per week. By the end of 2010, two million subscribers were using the agriculture service, which includes information provided by Syngenta.
Cocoa is one of the most important cash crops grown in Cameroon, but often it is difficult for smallholder famers to access markets and sell their crop. In 2010, Syngenta set up a program to help these farmers through partnerships with smallholder cooperatives, government agencies and cocoa traders. The program provides agronomy training
to produce higher yields and better quality cocoa beans. “We are also sharing knowledge about entrepreneurship accounting and savings so farms can operate as successful businesses and not be forced to sell at lower prices,” says Aurore Jamet, project manager for Camcoa 300TM. Over 500 growers spanning 1,500 hectares have been trained thus far, with a target to reach 25,000 growers.
“The Camcoa project will help us to commercialize our efforts by creating a link between traders and farmers. The training about savings will enable farmers to invest in their cocoa trees, and Syngenta training brings us the knowledge we need in order to protect our culture.”
Stephen Nkwen
Cocoa grower
Featured left: Stephen Nkwen (right), Aurore Jamet, Syngenta in Cameroon (middle); and André Moukam, grower (left).
Watch video and find out more www.syngenta.com/ar2010
Increasing access to markets
Syngenta also works with local partners to help open markets for farmers. The NUCOFFEETM initiative in Brazil, for example, connects growers, cooperatives, and roasters in a transparent business partnership.
The program helps mitigate the financial risks farmers face when investing in inputs with the uncertainty
of growing and selling a coffee crop. With the right agronomy advice and technology, they are able to meet demanding international quality standards, sell their harvest and become profitable farmers.
These Syngenta examples demonstrate that global agriculture demands a range of approaches that are specific to crops, localities, resources and cultures. There is no one way to reach food security, but integrated solutions that recognize the links between technology, land and people can make great strides toward this ambition. Syngenta is helping to put into the hands of growers innovative technologies and knowledge that can enhance yields, improve incomes, and protect natural resources.
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

  14
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Our offer
Integrated solutions for today’s farmer
   Leading in research and development
With a $1 billion annual investment in R&D and a global network of R&D centers, Syngenta leverages scientific insights
in plant physiology, chemistry, genetics and biotechnology to provide comprehensive programs that help address growers’ diverse and changing needs.
Conserving natural resources
Syngenta’s high-yielding seeds and innovative crop protection products help growers get more from existing land, and preserve ecosystems. This is complemented by our extensive training and stewardship programs to promote modern agricultural practice.
Global reach and experience
Our teams in over 90 countries use their local knowledge and understanding, together with the breadth of expertise from across the business, to tailor solutions that create value for growers. This unique insight gives Syngenta a sustainable competitive advantage.
    CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Through our world-class science, leading portfolio of crop solutions and strong presence in all agricultural markets, we are uniquely positioned to help growers around the world to grow more from less.
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
15
    Access to high- quality genetics
Syngenta has industry-leading genetics and traits, and we breed high-quality seeds for corn, soybean, sunflower and other field crops, vegetables and flowers. We use conventional breeding techniques as well
as modern biotechnology to provide growers with the best choice for high yields
and quality.
Protecting and
enhancing plant
performance
Our broad range of safe and efficient products protect crops from planting to maturity, guarding them from insects and disease, while reducing competition from weeds for nutrients and water. They also improve plant vigor and help reduce yield losses in periods of drought.
Benefits for customers and rural communities
Our innovations and technology benefit
our customers in many ways. Consumers appreciate features such as better taste and healthier food. In rural communities, we help to improve livelihoods through raising agricultural productivity, training and stewardship programs.
    CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

   16
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Addressing growers’ needs
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Syngenta uses its expertise in plant breeding,
crop protection and seed care to deliver solutions designed to bring plant potential to life. Whether they grow corn or rice, vegetables or flowers, farmers around the world trust Syngenta to help them produce healthy, premium crops and minimize
the use of precious natural resources.
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
17
  Sales in Corn
$m
Corn
Around 60 percent of global corn production is destined for animal feed. This means that the global importance of corn is expanding particularly in emerging markets, where growth in meat consumption is increasing. Corn growers are also supplying other end uses such as sweeteners, plastics and – particularly in the US – biofuels.
Corn is one of the most productive crops: plant one seed, and you get over 500 kernels in return. Hybridization over many years has allowed enormous productivity gains, and this has been complemented in the last decade by the development of biotech traits in North America, Latin America, Asia and South Africa. As a result, the value of corn seed has risen, and seed selection has become a key grower decision. In addition, to safeguard their substantial investment in seed, growers need a range of solutions to protect their
crop from weeds, insects and environmental stress.
Leading herbicide range
These solutions have to evolve to meet new challenges. In 2010, the full extent of weed resistance to glyphosate became widely acknowledged, with nine resistant weeds now identified in the USA. Syngenta anticipated this development early on, and in 2005 launched glyphosate pre-mixes that deal effectively with resistant weeds while retaining the convenience of glyphosate. Sales of HALEX® GT have expanded rapidly over the last two years, building on the success of comprehensive pre- and post-emergence weed control programs such as LUMAX® and LEXAR®.
Crop enhancement in corn
  CropProtection 1,290 Seed Care 240 Seeds 850 Total 2,380
Combinations of our leading crop protection chemistries are also driving crop enhancement in corn. New fungicide programs including QUILT XCEL® and QUADRIS® led to a significant increase in adoption over the previous year, as growers recognized benefits in yield, quality, and ease of harvesting.
In Seed Care, we have built on the success of CRUISER® insect control with the launch in the
USA of AVICTA®, the first nematicide seed treatment. Growers had previously not realized the extent of the damage caused by nematodes which, by virtue of their scattered presence, can be difficult to locate and combat. AVICTA® COMPLETE PAK offers a convenient and targeted solution that also includes CRUISER® and the fungicide DYNASTY®, based on the active ingredient azoxystrobin. AVICTA® has now also been launched on soybean where it has significant potential.
Germplasm diversity
Alongside a world-leading crop protection portfolio
for corn, Syngenta has a global corn seed business founded on research and development platforms that leverage diverse germplasm resources. We combine these resources with state-of-the-art breeding technology and the strength of local breeding programs to deliver a continuous flow of high- performance products. Our performance in Southeast Asia is one example of the success of this strategy: development of our proprietary tropical germplasm has given us leading market positions in both Vietnam and Thailand. And in China, we are broadening our portfolio by drawing on resources from both Europe and North America.
    All crop sales in this section are based on Syngenta estimates.
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

   Watch video and find out more www.syngenta.com/ar2010
 18
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Addressing growers’needs
Germplasm performance underpins the rapid progress in our US corn seed business. Following the acquisitions of Garst and Golden Harvest in 2004, we embarked on a major product overhaul that involved pooling and then crossing the acquired germplasm. Today, our unique portfolio offers genetic diversity and demonstrates advantages over the competition in yield performance.
Innovation in biotechnology
Syngenta’s germplasm is now accompanied by an outstanding suite of biotech traits. The AGRISURE® 3000GT triple stack reached market levels of penetration in 2010, accounting for around 60 percent of the offer. At the end of the year, in time for the 2011 season, we launched AGRISURE VIPTERATM – our first distinctive proprietary trait with unparalleled broad lepidoptera control. Initial yield data and market reception were highly positive. We were also the first company to bring to market a water optimization solution with the launch of AGRISURE ARTESIANTM,
a native trait offer with the potential for subsequent biotech combinations. An output of our deep understanding of water use efficiency at the genomics level combined with extensive breeding programs, AGRISURE ARTESIANTM, offers 15 percent yield preservation in mid- to high-drought conditions without yield drag.
We are leveraging our traits across borders, with the launch of double stack corn in Argentina and of VIPTERA in Brazil. Launched initially as a single trait, VIPTERA has now become part of the first triple stack product to receive approval in Brazil. We are also creating stacking possibilities in the Philippines with the launch of GA21 herbicide tolerance in addition to our existing Bt offer. Our goal is to enable corn growers around the world to capture value from the improved productivity necessary to sustain economic development. We will do this by offering tailored solutions that embrace the full range of technologies.
Towards the perfect
ear of corn
Every year in the US, yield and grain quality losses add up to an estimated 238 million bushels of corn, or $1.1 billion. But like many corn growers, Mike Schmidt from De Witt, Iowa, had come to accept the significant losses that unpredictable and damaging pests like the black cutworm and corn earworm can cause. These insects do their damage unseen, and they are very difficult tocontrolusingtraditionalinsecticides.
The USDA approval of AGRISURE VIPTERATM in April and introduction into the market in autumn 2010 generated excitement. Nonetheless, growers are fairly risk-averse and highly tactical in
how they evaluate new corn traits, so there was some initial skepticism. With a novel mode of action controlling more above ground pests than any other product
on the market, Syngenta’s new seed
trait just sounded too good to be true.
But after seeing the results on his fields, Mike is a believer.
“In our area we haven’t paid as much attention to above-ground pest pressure like corn earworm and black cutworm before, because by the time we had noticed the damage, it was too late or there was no way to effectively control them. AGRISUREVIPTERATM controls these pests well and gives us season-long control of these above-ground pests, so there
is no need to worry or scout any of these fields.”
Mike Schmidt
Farmer, DeWitt, Iowa, USA
Featured above: Mike Schmidt (left) and Rich Lee, Syngenta Field Agronomist.
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Soybean
Protein meal for animals accounts for around 70 percent of global soybean production, and demand from emerging markets is increasing. Most of the world’s production–morethan80percent–isconcentrated
in the USA, Brazil and Argentina. Productivity is vital to growers in these countries as they compete to satisfy increasing demand for imports, especially from China.
Latin American growers have made enormous strides in productivity despite soybean rust, an endemic and devastating disease. Effective treatment of the disease has enabled the expansion of soybean production – the market for related crop protection products is now over$1billion.Syngentaplaysaleadingrolewitha one-third share of the market. This reflects the success of the mixture product PRIORI XTRA®, particularly in areas of high disease pressure.
Managing weed resistance
US growers have become accustomed to managing crops more easily since glyphosate was introduced in the mid-1990s. But the emergence of glyphosate- resistant weeds over the last five years has made it imperative to adopt a more differentiated approach. Syngenta’s portfolio of selective herbicides for soybean – now marketed in the form of glyphosate pre-mixes – has provided a cost-effective and convenient solution.
www.syngenta.com/ar2010
Multiple ways of protecting high quality seeds
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
  Sales in Soybean 19 Soybean has traditionally been perceived as having $m
less value than corn. But its potential for yield improvement through high-quality germplasm, as well as native and biotech traits, is attracting increasing attention.
In the USA, the strong performance of Syngenta’s germplasm underpinned the 2010 gain in market share. We are building on this advantage by offering integrated solutions that include seeds, crop protection and seed care. For example, the Aphid Management System combines seed varieties bred with genetic resistancetoaphidswithCRUISERMAXX® seed treatment, which also boosts yield and vigor. And high- yielding varieties with genetic resistance to the soybean cyst nematode are now complemented by AVICTA®, the nematicide seed treatment launched for corn a year ago and now available also for soybean.
In Latin America, where we have already combined our Crop Protection and Seeds sales forces, integrated offers will further expand our footprint. In Brazil, the successofVMAX® soybean,whichcombinesthe advantages of glyphosate-tolerant technology with fast-maturing germplasm, has driven rapid gains
in market share. In Argentina, the acquisition of SPS in 2008 gave us a platform for the introduction of
new technology.
We see considerable potential for leverage between our North and Latin American businesses, and we are using advanced breeding selection tools to increase speed to market for high-performing varieties.
Breakthrough seed treatment technology
In 2010, we were able offer soybeans to Argentine growers that are fully protected from insects and diseases. The technology brings together Syngenta’s leading seed care products CRUISER® and AVICTA® with a long lasting inoculant that increases soybeans’ ability to resist diseases. This integrated technology protects the seeds from
the moment of planting – the stage at which they are particularly vulnerable – and also helps the young plants withstand adverse climatic conditions.
Field trials have shown very encouraging results and first sales have already reached $3 million. The product is being produced at three sites in Argentina and has excellent potential for long-term growth.
“Achieving good seed distribution and germination is the key for us to obtain the best yields. We have decided to use Syngenta technology because sprouting is almost
100 percent.”
Jorge Sunino
Soybean grower, Argentina
Pictured left: Jorge Sunino (right) and Pablo Rugeroni, Technical Services Engineer at Syngenta.
CropProtection 1,290 Seed Care 170 Seeds 430 Total 1,890
       Find out more
  CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Addressing growers’needs 20 Cereals
Wheat is the world’s largest crop, planted on some 225 million hectares. With bread and pasta as staples in Western diets and increasing in popularity elsewhere, it is vital to have a plentiful supply as well as a wide range of top-quality varieties with different taste and milling characteristics. And, as consumption in emerging markets increases due to changing diets, meeting the additional demand means that the average global yield of three tons per hectare must rise. There is no doubt about the potential: growers in some Western European countries already achieve more than three times
this figure.
But in the summer of 2010, world wheat production suffered a setback from devastating fires in Russia.
In recent years, Russia has not only expanded its domestic wheat supply, but has also become a major exporter. So the cut in production caused world wheat prices to rise sharply. These events highlight the need for sustained productivity increases that enable markets to better withstand future supply shocks.
Expanding the offer in Eastern Europe
An immediate priority for Syngenta is to work with growers in Russia and across Eastern Europe to increase their long-term output and profitability. Expanding the crop protection range is key to this. For example, despite difficult market conditions in 2010, sales in the region for our new cereal herbicide AXIAL® grew by over 50 percent. The fungicide AMISTAR® also expanded rapidly and is starting to take the place of older competitor chemistry. And use of CRUISER® seed treatment on wheat is resulting in increased vigor, particularly in cold conditions, and enabling growers
to plant their crop earlier.
Integrated growing systems for cereals
Globally, solutions like CRUISER® show the potential for crop enhancement in wheat. The plant growth regulator MODDUS®, in addition to its benefits in creating a shorter, stronger plant, increases root mass, resulting in improved water and nutrient uptake and better tolerance to drought and heat. In 2010, we launched the next-generation fungicide isopyrazam on barley in the UK and on wheat in New Zealand. Isopyrazam has a new mode of action, and controls
a wide range of diseases while delivering higher yields. In barley it is a key element of a new integrated growing system that enables growers to increase productivity by treating their crop more systematically, as they already do for wheat.
By developing new varieties of wheat seeds alongside our crop protection and seed treatment programs, Syngenta can target productivity improvements
at many levels. We are the world leader in cereals seeds, with cutting-edge breeding technologies
that include marker-assisted breeding and double- haploid technology.
In April 2010, we announced an agreement with the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT). This public-private partnership will lead to joint research and development – in the areas of traits, hybrid wheat, and the combination of seeds and crop protection – to accelerate plant yield performance. It will allow Syngenta to take advantage of its genetic
Sales in Cereals
$m
Crop Protection 1,150 Seed Care 170 Seeds 60 Total 1,380
       marker technology and traits platform to wheat productivity in emerging markets.
improve
  Find out more   www.syngenta.com/ar2010
Braving the weather
Sandy Norrie is Arable Manager at the
A J Duncan farm at Muirden in North East Scotland. The farm has been involved with hybrid barley since 2003, when Syngenta launched Colossus, the world’s first hybrid winter barley variety. Sandy also has a lot of experience with Syngenta spring barley varieties including Optic and, more recently, Waggon and Forensic.
As a participant of a new hybrid barley case study in 2010, A J Duncan profiled Boost, Volume and Element hybrid barley varieties. The farm saw yield improvements of 10 percent and more, compared with standard varieties. Combined with Syngenta’s leading crop protection products and expert know-how, the new innovative hybrid barley varieties come with major benefits. They can be grown under challenging weather conditions, and they deliver an improved grain quality, helping the grower to get the most from every hectare.
“The new varieties truly show an improved performance. Not only do we see higher yields and better grain quality, the crops are hardier too.”
Sandy Norrie
Arable Manager, A J Duncan farm, Muirden, Scotland
Featured above: Sandy Norrie (left) and
Tom Mitchell, Business Manager at Syngenta.
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Rice
Rice plays a more crucial role in human food consumption than any other major field crop. It provides 60 percent of the calorie intake for more than two billion people every day. In Asia, where 90 percent of the world’s rice is grown, average per capita consumption is more than one kilogram a week.
And yet progress in rice productivity still lags behind the advances made in other crops. Governments
in the emerging markets of Asia are increasingly responding to this challenge with support and incentives to help modernize farming practices.
Syngenta is participating in the process of modernization by expanding the range of products and services available to rice growers. Our goal is to achieve a step change in yield while improving rice quality.
Expanding chemical solutions
Until now, chemical usage in rice has focused mainly on herbicides and older insecticides. With the expansion of the new insecticide VIRTAKO®, part of the DURIVO® range, Syngenta is delivering a new mode of action offering both insect control and increased plant vigor. We are developing new markets for broad- spectrum disease control with ARMURE®, and we
see an increasing opportunity for AMISTAR® which, following the expansion of our production capacity, we can now start to capture.
Doubling yield potential
Seed Care is another example of the ways in which Asian rice growers are adopting new technology.
The combination of CRUISER® with high-yielding hybrids and complete crop protection programs is delivering benefits to growers in high potential areas. We are further expanding our integrated offer with the introduction in India of TEGRATM, a solution for small- scale rice growers. The solution consists of planting high quality seed coated with seed treatment, followed by a new system of mechanical transplanting for the seedlings to reduce labor input. A crop care protocol is applied during the growth period and, in total, TEGRATM increases yields by an average 30 percent.
Water efficiency
Sales in Rice
21
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
  Traditional rice cultivation relies heavily on the availability $m of water, and reduced water input during any part of
the growing cycle has an impact on plant growth and
yield. Syngenta is breeding hybrid rice varieties with
 short and medium maturities and correspondingly lower water needs. Because rice growers face variable conditions – for example, flash flooding that can also damage the crop – we are developing native traits that can better withstand temporary submergence.
Bringing technology to smallholders
In Asia alone, there are more than 200 million rice farmers for whom the extension and transfer of knowledge will play a vital role in securing a sustainable livelihood. Syngenta’s locally based teams are focused on providing not only products but also the necessary tools, support and training to enable smallholder farmers to achieve this.
Crop Protection Seed Care Seeds
Total
530 30 10 570
      Find out more   www.syngenta.com/ar2010
Growing more rice, more easily
In Asia, rice is life: more than two billion people depend on the crop for their daily calorie intake. Productivity currently ranges from two to eight tons per hectare across the continent.
In developed Asia, productivity is high and planting has been standardized through mechanization for over 15 years. By contrast, in developing Asia, productivity remains low and planting is mainly done by hand.
Syngenta launched a project to look at proven technologies in rice farming and identify the best ways to make them accessible to farmers in developing markets, regardless of the scale of operation. Our combined expertise in seeds, plant care, growing media, and crop protection means we are ideally placed to deliver an end-to-end solution for these growers.
The result is TEGRATM: a new seedling technology, adapted for each unique rice ecosystem, delivering proprietary products, mechanically transplanted and supported by Syngenta’s comprehensive agronomy consultation services.
“I like the way the Syngenta agronomist helps me to take good care of my crop, and to overcome problems with insects and diseases.
Transplanting is much easier and the crop stays healthier over the whole season.”
Nukala Janaki Rami Reddy
Rice grower in India
Featured above: Nukala Reddy (right) with Hari Gopal, CTP Manager at Syngenta.
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Addressing growers’needs 22
A planting revolution for sugar cane
Production of sugar cane is under pressure, as global demand for sugar and ethanol rapidly outpaces the abilities of a largely manual industry to keep up. So Syngenta established a team to focus on technology that would simplify operations and ensure sustainability.
The result is revolutionary. In 2011 in Brazil, Syngenta will introduce PLENETM, an innovative technology that allows more frequent re-planting and therefore higher yields and less impact on the environment.
PLENETM simplifies production by providing sugar cane cuttings treated with seed care to protect against disease and insects for healthier crops. The cuttings are only 4cm long – the plant cuttings of conventional systems are
10 times that length. Because of the smaller size, John Deere was able to develop planting equipment designed especially for PLENETM that is lighter on the soil and uses less fuel.
“Thanks to the radical simplification it offers, PLENETM isatruegamechanger.ThebenefitsI will get in terms of improved convenience and reduced cost are truly really exciting.”
Gustavo Villa Gomes
Miller, Brazil
Featured left: Gustavo Villa Gomes (right) and Alexandre Peres, Syngenta Sales Representative New Technologies Cane.
Watch video and find out more www.syngenta.com/ar2010
The insecticide ACTARA® is used to control sucking and chewing pests, and delivers an additional vigor effect that results in a 10 percent yield advantage. The plant growth regulator MODDUS® allows growers to control the timing of the harvest to achieve maximum sugar yield; it also enhances root development in the growing cane, making uptake
of water and nutrients more efficient.
In 2010, we launched ENGEO®, a chemical solution for termite control. Unlike existing products on the market, ENGEO® does not persist in the environment or harm beneficial termites that break down cane residues after harvesting. PRIORI XTRA®, a fungicide widely used
in Brazil to combat soybean rust, became the first product to be authorized for orange rust in sugar cane.
Integrated technology
PLENETM is a breakthrough technology in sugar cane planting, combining chemistry, plant genetics and application technology to provide a truly integrated solution. We will offer top commercial cane varieties in small cuttings coated with proprietary seed treatment. A shift from manual to mechanical planting will improve safety and address the issue of labor shortage. Growers will now be able to re-plant cane more frequently, with younger plants producing higher yields. Broader benefits include the more effective use of natural resources.
    Sales in Sugar cane
$m
Crop Protection Seed Care Seeds
Total
150 0 0 150
Sugar cane
Sugar cane meets 70 percent of global sugar needs and is the most cost-effective feedstock for plant- derived ethanol. But traditionally, this crop has attracted little technology investment and yields are well below what they could be. In order to release
this potential, Syngenta has been making significant investments in sugar cane. We are now the first company to market integrated solutions that offer improved yield and quality to cane growers and millers.
Crop enhancement combined with pest control
In Brazil, which accounts for over 50 percent of global sugar cane production, our Crop Protection portfolio is already delivering broad benefits to growers.
       CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Oilseeds and sugar beet
While food security is a critical concern in many emerging markets, consumers in developed countries have the luxury of favoring products that further benefit their health. Vegetable oils made from sunflower and oilseed rape are preferred because they are relatively high in unsaturated fats. High consumer demand makes these plants attractive for growers, as does their yield stability under adverse growing conditions and benefits to the entire production system, particularly in rotation with cereals.
Oilseeds: improving yield and oil content
In recent years, cultivation of sunflower in emerging markets has flourished – these markets now account for 75 percent of global output. Often, growers’ first impulse is to expand acreage. But to maximize the sustainability of the crop, they need to focus on the type and quality of seed used. Syngenta has made significant emerging market investments in this crop over the last decade. We are driving the shift towards high-performing hybrid varieties through the introduction of best-in-class genetics adapted to local conditions. Superior germplasm leads to enhanced stability under stress and to yield increases that are further accelerated by applying our leading Seed Care products. In addition, we regularly launch varieties with specific native traits such as high oleic acid composition and disease resistance.
Selected acquisitions have augmented our world leadership in sunflowers. Acquired in 2008, SPS has broadened our reach by establishing our presence in the mid-value segment in Argentina. Our acquisition of Monsanto’s global sunflower business was concluded at the end of 2010 and complements our existing germplasm strength in a number of markets.
Syngenta operates a global network of sunflower breeding stations that target all aspects of yield improvement, as well as traits to address stress tolerance and fatty acid composition.
In Northern Europe, oilseed rape is grown to serve both the edible oil and biodiesel markets. Hybridization is driving growth in value, and Syngenta is providing high-performing hybrids with seed care combinations for strong crop establishment. In Canada, where oilseed rape is grown as canola, Syngenta sells a range of crop protection chemicals for application throughout the season.
Sugar beet: capturing value for growers
Sugar beet is an industrial crop used in food processing, as well as in biogas and ethanol production. For growers in Western and Central Europe, it is already a high value crop. But in Eastern Europe, while acreage and volumes are high, there is substantial scope to increase seed quality.
In 2010, Syngenta consolidated its European business through the acquisition of the Maribo® brand, sold in 35 countries, together with its seed production and sales activities.
The size of the sugar beet market in the USA has doubled in value since 2008, following the introduction of glyphosate-tolerant sugar beet and the expansion of seed treatment. Growers’ rapid adoption of glyphosate tolerance, which in 2010 represented 95 percent of the market, demonstrates the ability of biotechnology to transform the economics of growing a crop.
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Sales in Oilseeds and 23 sugar beet $m
Crop Protection 290 Seed Care 100 Seeds 460 Total 850
         Find out more
A healthy growth forecast
Due in part to diets high in saturated fats, life expectancy in Russia continues to lag behind that in other parts of Europe. At the same time, the country is the world’s largest market for sunflower seed, and while the number of hectares devoted to sunflowers has been growing, yield growth has not kept up.
Oil from a high oleic sunflower hybrid – which has a healthy fatty acid composition and can lower cholesterol as effectively
as more expensive olive oils – could
have a big impact on this market and
on overall health.
“From grower to processor to consumer, our high oleic sunflower varieties add value. 18,000 units of high oleic seeds were sold in 2010, more than five times the 2008 figure. Given the need to provide more healthy oil products to the Russian people, we are perfectly positioned to gain market share.”
Hachares Babiyan
Syngenta Territory Sales Manager Rostov, Russia
Featured left: Hachares Babiyan (left) and Alexander Sapronov, Chief Agronomist, Manitek Farm.
www.syngenta.com/ar2010
To make this happen, Syngenta combined product innovation with a commitment
to distribution across the country and
to forging a strong chain from grower
to consumer.
It also sought out a partnership with
a significant oil producer, and found one in ASTON, a Russian food processor. The result was Zateya Gold sunflower oil, now available in supermarkets across Russia.
  CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Addressing growers’needs 24 Vegetables
The global vegetable seeds market is worth over
$4 billion and continues to grow, driven by consumer demand for fresh produce. Technology is playing an increasing role in meeting multiple requirements that go beyond consumer priorities of taste and convenience. Vegetable growers focus on yield, cost and resistance to disease, while retailers demand attractive appearance, consistency of supply and long shelf life.
Global growth, rapid emerging market expansion
Vegetable consumption in developed markets continues to rise, reflecting increased awareness of the link between health and diet. Yet the fastest growth rates are found in emerging markets: while increased meat consumption is often highlighted, growing prosperity brings a desire for better quality and more varied vegetables, facilitated by the expansion of retailer channels. Sales of Syngenta vegetable seeds in these markets have risen by a compound average of 21 percent over the last five years.
Integrated technology
Globally, we have augmented consistent increases in vegetable seeds sales with strategic acquisitions to broaden our diverse germplasm base. Through advanced breeding and new native traits, we are continuously delivering new benefits across the value chain. We complement our seeds offer with our range of fungicides and insecticides, which we have adapted to meet the rigorous quality demands of both consumers and retailers. The roll-out of our new fungicide REVUS® in 14 additional countries
in 2010 has further reinforced our position.
Examples of our integrated offer include the combination of clubroot resistance and insecticide treatment for cauliflower. New disease-resistant seed varieties are coated with FARMORE® Seed Care technology with two components: fungicides to protect against soil and airborne fungal diseases and an insecticide treatment to replace field-applied products in an environmentally favorable way.
Global resources, local offer
Syngenta has a global R&D presence that provides economies of scale and a broad germplasm base. We leverage this alongside our expertise in genetics to develop seed varieties tailored to meet local needs.
In emerging markets, the focus is on improving quality and productivity. In Brazil, for example, we are the only company driving the rapid expansion of the processed sweet corn market. We owe our success to a focus on product features that matter to consumers – tenderness and taste – as well as on efficiency for processors. We have pioneered a shift from feed corn into sweet corn and have developed high-quality tropical varieties that are opening up new export markets for our customers. We are now developing our breeding program to enable expansion into the fresh sweet corn market.
In India, we have a broad offer across a large number of high-value crops. We have differentiated our technology by adapting it to the local market, offering solutions such as native traits for disease resistance
in tomatoes. Our offer increases the reliability and abundance of the harvest for growers whose livelihood often depends on a single crop.
Sales in Vegetables
$m
Crop Protection 900 Seed Care 60 Seeds 660 Total 1,620
         Find out more   www.syngenta.com/ar2010
A winning combination
A few seasons ago, Syngenta introduced new baby plum tomato Angelle to a selected group of growers in the UK. It was also introduced at Marks & Spencer, a retailer known for its high quality products. Today, Angelle is grown in several European countries, and is available all year round thanks to the unique partnership between Syngenta and integrated growers and retailers.
Leading Angelle grower Juan Romera from Almeria, Spain, has always believed in the value of technology. Supported by technical experts from his local cooperative, SAT Acrena, he has been keen to grow new varieties and implement the most demanding crop protocols. His production techniques are recognized by export markets, and leading retailers are happy
to work with him as a supplier.
“I truly enjoy our partnership: it’s based on expertise, trust, honesty and dedication. One great example is the beneficial insects from Syngenta Bioline that I use to both protect my crop from pests and to provide consumers with healthy products. With Angelle, Syngenta bred a distinctive product that meets the needs of retailers and consumers, as well as my own standards as a grower.”
Juan Romera
Grower, Spain
Featured above: Juan Romera (right) and David Murcia, Tomato Product Manager at Syngenta.
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Lawn and Garden
Demand for lawn and garden products is closely linked to consumer spending. Golf courses represent a major source of demand for turf products – the more rounds of golf played, the greater the scope for investment
by golf course superintendents. Demand for flowers reflects how much consumers are prepared to invest in their gardens, as well as how much risk retailers are willing to undertake in terms of inventory. Here, efficient logistics are vital to minimize waste and ensure quality.
Solutions for growers and their customers
Syngenta combines its genetics, controls and growing media to provide a comprehensive and integrated offer to professional ornamental growers. This ensures healthy plant growth and, together with best-in-class logistics, aligns plant flowering time with display by retailers. Only through this level of service can demand at peak periods be met – for example, with 140 million poinsettias delivered in time for Christmas.
Our new QMAX technology represents a more efficient way of growing pelargonium and other crops. Plants are grown in the dark under sterile conditions, resulting in an increased growth rate compared with tissue culture. Now being implemented in Guatemala, the technology offers lower costs for pelargonium cuttings, with greater flexibility and reliability.
Consumers want variety and convenience. Over the past few years, Syngenta has significantly expanded its range of flowers through several acquisitions.
At the same time, we have gained leading positions in key crops such as pansy and pelargonium, giving us an unrivaled ability to refresh and adapt the range using our large germplasm base. This allows us to meet consumer demand for plants that are easy to grow and maintain.
We are also meeting consumer needs with the expansion of our chemical controls business at
the retail level. We have achieved this through the establishment of partnerships with leading branded manufacturers to supply major garden centers and home improvement outlets.
Broad approach to turf market
In the golf market, high quality playability and aesthetics are key priorities. Purchasing decisions
are still influenced by cost, but the industry is increasingly moving beyond pest control to solutions that take environmental issues into account –
including water usage and biodiversity. A collaborative effort by Syngenta and Marriott Golf has resulted in a new tool for golf course superintendents in the ongoing effort to promote sustainability, foster environmental stewardship and reduce the carbon footprint of golf course operations.
Sales in Lawn and Garden $m
Crop Protection Seed Care Seeds
Total
25
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
    470 0 340 810
     Find out more   www.syngenta.com/ar2010
Maintaining the Home of Golf
St Andrews Links on the east coast of Scotland is acknowledged as the Home
of Golf, where the game has been nurtured and developed for over 600 years.
The Old Course, home of the 2010
Open Championship, is renowned
as the pinnacle of links golf.
St Andrews Links Trust Director of Greenkeeping, Gordon Moir, and his greenkeeping teams on the seven outstanding courses managed by the Trust, employ a range of traditional turf management techniques to maintain the most prestigious golf playing surfaces. This includes using the Syngenta products RESCUE® and HERITAGE®.
The Old Course at St Andrews Links remains a public course, open to golfers from around the world to test their prowess under conditions that challenge the world’s greatest.
“We have been impressed with the Syngenta products and believe they have helped us maintain the playing surfaces more consistently and economically.”
Gordon Moir
Director of Greenkeeping,
St Andrews Links Trust, Scotland
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

   26
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Creating our offer
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 From the fridge to the field
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
27
    R&D investment 2010
$1,032m
$952m1 2009
Research and Development
Syngenta scientists around the world help meet growers’ needs by developing new ways to increase crop yields and quality in a sustainable way. We are uniquely positioned to develop integrated solutions for our customers by combining our expertise in bioscience, chemistry, crop genetics and agronomy.
Research and development (R&D) investment in 2010 was over $1 billion, reinforcing our industry-leading position. We employ nearly 5,000 people at R&D centers and field stations around the world, and continue to invest in the development of our people, technical capabilities and external partnerships.
When Syngenta Research Scientist Greg Warren took a sample of sour milk to the lab, he probably didn’t expect that the bacteria species he isolated would lead to a revolutionary insecticide – one that takes pest control
in corn and cotton to a new level.
Named Vip3A (Vegetative Insecticidal Protein 3A), the new protein is active against a wide range of insect pests and can help prolong the life of other related insect control technologies. The Vip3A-based AGRISURE VIPTERATM 3111 and VipCotTM products deliver unparalleled broad spectrum efficacy against corn and cotton insect pests. And opportunities with other crops like soybean and rice look very promising.
“While the discovery of Vip3A might sound like sheer coincidence, it is the result of a very orderly scientific approach. Our scientists were deliberately testing a wide variety of materials that might harbor bacteria with novel toxins. The fact that the ‘winner’ protein happened to come from Greg’s fridge was lucky in one sense, but also the well-deserved reward for the innovative and diligent work his team had done.”
Eric Chen
Principal Research Scientist at Syngenta
Featured left: Eric Chen (left) and Greg Warren, now a Patent Attorney at Syngenta.
Find out more www.syngenta.com/ar2010
Global strength
We have an integrated R&D organization that exploits the power of our knowledge, capabilities and resources to solve growers’ problems through the combination of seeds genetics, traits and chemistry. Our global product safety and regulatory platforms enable us to discover, develop and register new products faster and more efficiently. We are increasingly working in networks to advance knowledge on important topics, tapping into the expertise and ideas of all our scientists.
In Europe, recent investments in Syngenta’s major Crop Protection research facilities at Jealott’s Hill, UK, and Stein, Switzerland, have created internationally renowned centers of excellence. For growers and stakeholders, these sites are a great place to experience first-hand the strength of our product offering and the importance of our technology in meeting food security challenges.
As our business grows rapidly in emerging markets, we recognize a wealth of potential opportunities.
  1 After effect of accounting policy change for post-employment benefits described in Note 2 to the Syngenta Group consolidated financial statements in the Financial Report 2010, which
is available on our website at www.syngenta.com/ir
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Creating our offer
28
Target launch
2011–2014
PLENETM Sedaxane Bicyclopyrone Cyantraniliprole SYN 192
InvinsaTM1
Post 2014 Herbicide Fungicide Insecticide
New crop enhancer
Lab research
Early development
Late development
Peak sales
>$1.7bn >$0.5bn
Through expansion of R&D activities and partnerships in Asia, Latin America and Eastern Europe, we can tap into local scientific expertise and gain useful insights for future growth.
Our site in Goa, India, is at the center of our efforts to accelerate new product development through closer interaction between research and process chemists. We completed the expansion of the facility there at the end of 2010. We are also building up our biotechnology center in Beijing, China, which focuses on early-stage evaluation of genetically modified traits. In Singapore, we opened a new center for formulation development and marker-assisted breeding technology.
Integrated solutions for specific needs
We introduced a number of innovative technologies
in 2010. This included our new insect control trait technology in corn, AGRISURE VIPTERATM, which was launched in the US and received a prestigious Agrow Award in the Best Novel Agricultural Biotechnology category. And a new mode of action cereal fungicide, isopyrazam, was launched in the UK for use in winter and spring barley.
Syngenta scientists are committed to delivering new solutions that can transform the productivity of world agriculture, and meeting the stringent criteria of our industry's regulatory environment. Our main focus is the discovery and development of high value, high quality, integrated products that address growers’ needs. For example, we are developing complementary solutions based on genetics, crop enhancement chemistry and
improved agronomic practice to improve water use efficiency. This is a key area of concern for growers, as competition for water resources will increase with population growth, urbanization and through the effects of climate change.
We have launched our first drought tolerant corn variety in the US – AGRISURE ARTESIANTM. Created through a native traits breeding approach, it is the first product to come from our crop genetics research that focuses on both genetically modified (GM) and non-GM approaches to protecting yield under water stress.
In wheat, programs using our crop enhancing MODDUS® have shown a 15–25 percent yield increase, with 15 percent less requirement for irrigation. The vigor effect on soybean treated with CRUISER® seed treatments leads to yield increase through increased roots and faster development of the crop canopy. The active ingredient in CRUISER®, thiamethoxam, activates plant processes that make crops more resilient under a variety of abiotic stress, such as drought.
Our pipelines encompass a broad range of chemical and biotechnology solutions, which we will progressively merge to reflect our holistic approach by crop. The current Crop Protection pipeline, with peak sales potential of over $2 billion, covers all
our main product lines. In 2011, we expect the first registration of Sedaxane, a broad spectrum seed treatment fungicide that can protect against diseases that are difficult to control in a number of crops.
  Crop Protection pipeline
                               Peak sales percentage split:
Corn
Soybean 1 InvisaTM, a trademark of AgroFresh Inc., a subsidiary of DAS
Cereals
Vegetables Rice
Sugar cane
Speciality
Other crops
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11
Seed Care fungicide
 Herbicide
 Stress tolerance
Fungicide
Insecticide
       
 Corn seeds pipeline
Launched 2010
AVICTA® COMPLETE CORN AGRISURE VIPTERATM AGRISURE ARTESIANTM Biotic stress
AGRISURE E-Z RefugeTM AGRISURETM next generation RW
Abiotic stress
Water opt., nitrogen use efficiency
Output traits
ENOGENTM CarbYieldTM
Early development
Late development
Initial Peak launches sales
Our pipeline for Corn seeds has a peak sales potential of more than $2 billion. It covers a broad range of biotech and native traits, which will be accompanied by ongoing genetic improvements. At the end of 2011, subject to regulatory approval, we plan to start launching refuge stack options in corn. We have applied for deregulation of our second generation corn rootworm trait scheduled for launch in 2014, which has a novel mode of action and is showing outstanding field trial results.
People and partners
The knowledge and passion of our people is a tremendous asset, and we recognize the value in personal development for all our employees. As an innovation leader, we attract top scientists from around the world and our focus on people is increasingly recognized externally. In the “2010 Top Employer” survey by “Science” magazine and the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Syngenta was voted seventh out of 575 companies.
Innovation is vital to grow our business. We look outwards to find new opportunities and complement our in-house capabilities. Syngenta has a variety of individual collaborations with universities and major agricultural institutes worldwide. For example, we have established a University Innovation Center at Imperial College, London, UK, as a hub for collaboration on systems biology, with initial projects focusing on predictive toxicology as well as tomato quality and flavor.
Syngenta Annual Review 2010
We recently established a public-private partnership with the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT) to advance the development of new technologies in cereals. Similarly, with the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), we are working to reduce constraints on rice productivity. These examples show our commitment to delivering effective solutions to improve global food security.
29
          2010 2010 2010
2012 2014
Post 2015
2011 Post 2015
>$2.0bn
                       CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Creating our offer
People
Every day, employees across the world live Syngenta’s purpose: Bringing plant potential to life. Their determination, focus and teamwork enables us to realize our growth ambitions. The foundations for our people processes, systems and programs are driven by the needs of our businesses, providing opportunities for personal growth, and recognizing the contribution of each of our employees.
Delivering business excellence
We strive to attract, develop and retain the right global pool of diverse talent to deliver on commitments to our stakeholders. We operate in a dynamic world, and our goal is to ensure that our people are equipped to deliver the integrated solutions our customers need. To meet these requirements, Syngenta must have a scalable, responsive organization that anticipates
new opportunities.
The employee value proposition
Syngenta is committed to providing opportunities
for both professional and personal development. Through our leadership approach, engagement programs and people processes, we recognize the contributions our employees make to our success. Growth and recognition are the basis of our employee value proposition.
Our “Taking Root” induction program welcomes new employees and ensures they have a good business and cultural understanding of the company as a whole, from a local and global perspective. The program aims to provide a richer, more in-depth approach than typical induction programs.
Graduates are an important group for developing our leadership pipeline. We have well-established general management programs such as “Grow in Syngenta”, a 4-5 year program geared towards broad and fast development of MBA graduates.
We also run local, specialist trainee programs, such
as the Syngenta R&D training program at our Takfah station in Thailand where agriculture students learn about our corn breeding, commercial seed production and farm management. In Brazil, our trainees gain business experience by working in sales, marketing, R&D and supply areas across our Crop Protection and Seeds business.
Syngenta invests in a variety of learning and development approaches. These include formal, classroom-based learning events, e-learning, and project-based development opportunities. We are developing mentoring and peer-to-peer coaching programs that facilitate the sharing of knowledge and experience. We have a world-class Marketing and Sales Excellence (MaSE) program, developed and run in partnership with INSEAD. This long established program has enabled us consistently to grow market share and has recently introduced MaSE Masters, an accreditation scheme to recognize top Marketing and Sales professionals. Through this scheme, Masters can practice their skills internationally, develop new capabilities and share knowledge with colleagues.
  30 Employees 26,179
25,925 2009
Syngenta Awards
1,100
Entries submitted in 2010.
   CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Recognizing contribution
Recognizing the efforts of employees is central to our culture. In 2010, we continued to run our successful internal recognition program, the Syngenta Awards.
In 2010, around 10,000 employees from over 50 countries entered nearly 1,100 stories. The stories exemplify Syngenta’s four values: innovation, intensity, health and performance. We also recognize entries that demonstrate particular ways of working that will help shape the future of our company, such as working in partnership with customers and stakeholders.
In November, we honored the regional finalists and winners at our global Syngenta Awards ceremony.
We have received a number of awards from external bodies that recognize the achievements of our employees. For the second year in a row, Syngenta was among the top biotechnology and pharmaceutical employers in a poll by “Science” magazine; ranking seventh in a field of 575 companies. In Switzerland, Syngenta was awarded second place at the Swiss
HR Award 2010 for Best Practice in Human Resource Management.
Looking forward
While celebrating our first ten years, we look forward to our future with confidence. Over the past decade, there have been many changes within Syngenta
and the world in which we operate. We firmly believe that our unique culture plays a key role in anchoring our organization during times of change and growth. We are proud of the contribution Syngenta employees make to living our purpose and values, thereby ensuring that we are able to help the world address the global agricultural challenges it faces now and in the future.
31
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
  Find out more www.syngenta.com/ar2010
 Charting clear paths for
career development
Syngenta’s continued success hinges not just on unlocking the potential of plants, but also on unlocking the potential of its many talented professionals. Bruno Frei, Head Capability and Career Management, knows what it means to have an exciting career path at Syngenta. When he started as a research chemist for a predecessor company 25 years ago, he never would have guessed that he would be running strategic talent management projects for Human Resources one day.
In 2009, Bruno became one of the “founders” of myCareer, a program, which was first designed and launched as part of the Marketing and Sales Excellence initiative (MaSE) to help people better manage their careers and develop their skills. In the meantime myCareer has also been developed in other functions and is rapidly becoming adopted as a global standard across Syngenta.
“Our myCareer tools help employees to understand and visualize their potential
career paths. As a result, Syngenta can deliver targeted learning and development based on individual needs, as well as the needs of the organization overall.”
Bruno Frei
Head Capability and Career Development at Syngenta
Featured above: Bruno Frei (right) with Scott McKinnon, Commercial Support Group Lead at Syngenta.
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

   32
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Creating our offer
Operations
The way we do business is central to our success as a company. This covers our people – where and how they work – our policies, our processes and our production. Moreover, it applies not only to our own activities, but also to those of our suppliers and partners too. We challenge ourselves to meet the highest standards.
Excelling in production and supply chain
Syngenta manufactures active ingredients for its
crop protection products at eight manufacturing sites around the world – in the USA, UK, Switzerland, China and India – and a further 18 facilities produce and package the finished products. Our seeds are produced both on Syngenta sites and by thousands of contract growers worldwide.
In 2010, Syngenta was ranked as the number one chemical manufacturer in AMR’s renowned Supply Chain report. The primary source for the report is the Fortune Global 500 companies. Expert and peer panels looked not only at our financial performance, but also at our strategic agenda, our connections to customers, and how we handle the volatility of the supply market.
In May 2010, we marked the completion of our largest ever single investment program. Designed to expand production capacity for key active ingredients, the program involved a capital investment of over $400 million. Much of this was concentrated in five locations: Monthey in Switzerland; Grangemouth in the UK; Goa in India; Omaha in the US; and Paulinia in Brazil. As a result of this investment, we are able
to bring key products to market more quickly
and efficiently.
We offer suppliers an audit program and help them achieve higher HSE standards. We also provide technical support to help suppliers be more efficient and reduce their variable costs. As a result, Syngenta receives higher quality supplies on time, and suppliers, in turn, build a longer-term relationship with an important customer. Our efforts were recognized in 2010 when we won the global Procurement Leaders Award for Innovation, which recognizes excellence and leadership in global procurement and supply chain.
Integrating processes
In 2009, we established Syngenta Business Services to integrate and standardize our transactional services across the organization. Today, the new function is
in place across 27 countries. It is already delivering business services in the areas of finance, procurement and information systems, all based on common, scalable tools and processes. It is now moving forward with a similar approach for human resources.
Health, safety and environment
Protecting the health and safety of our people,
our customers and the environment is of the utmost importance to Syngenta. This principle is embedded in Our Code of Conduct, and our Health, Safety and Environment (HSE) Policy and Standards.
Our global standards for suppliers harmonize existing local requirements on HSE and ethical behavior with our Code of Conduct. We have developed a system to monitor labor standards that focuses on four key areas: awareness of the Syngenta Code of Conduct among suppliers, health and safety, wages and benefits, and child labor.
Syngenta only employs individuals over the age of 16, unless it is permitted by law and under circumstances that protect their welfare. Our contracts with seed producers clearly forbid the use of child labor and make clear that we will terminate their contracts if they use children as workers. We work with the Fair Labor Association (FLA) to set and monitor labor standards in the seed supply chain.
We monitor the HSE and quality performance
of suppliers manufacturing crop protection products. Originally these assessments focused on suppliers in China and India, but we extended them to cover new contracts in Europe. In 2010, a total of
70 assessments have been completed.
Our HSE Policy and Standards guide our employees around the world. Strong HSE practices are central to the way we operate, so meeting the Syngenta HSE Standards is a core responsibility of every leader in the company. We measure health and safety through the global injury and illness rate (IIR, per 200,000 hours worked). We aim to maintain a low
IIR of 0.5 or below. In 2010, the rate was 0.39, which is a seven percent decrease compared to 2009.
Syngenta is committed to reducing the environmental impacts of its operations, particularly the greenhouse gas emissions that contribute to climate change.
In 2010, our CO2-equivalent emissions totaled
1.30 million metric tonnes. We measure our carbon efficiency based on kilograms of CO2 equivalents per dollar of operational income (kg CO2e/$EBIT). In 2010, we emitted 0.66 kg CO2e/$EBIT. Our target is to reduce this figure to 0.56 by 2012, a 40 percent reduction compared with the 2006 baseline.
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Intellectual property
The protection of intellectual property (IP) is essential to any research-based business with long-term investment. An efficient and fair IP system helps to balance the interests of the inventor and society by helping to pay for research costs and contributing to sharing knowledge which stimulates further research and innovation.
It is our policy not to execute our patent rights where agriculture is undertaken for subsistence purposes and we do not enforce patents and applications in seeds or biotechnology in Least Developed Countries (LDCs) for private and non-commercial use.
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
CO2e emissions
0.66
CO2e kg /$EBIT
Illness and injury rate1
0.39
0.42
33
    Watch video and find out more
Improving working
conditions in India
For many children in rural India, the need to work to help provide food for their families is a reality. As a result, they never get the education that could help them break the cycle of poverty.
Syngenta first started partnering with the Fair Labor Association (FLA) to develop a new approach to the issue of child labor in 2004. In 2009, it launched the “me & mine” program nationwide in collaboration with the FLA.
“me & mine” established a code of acceptable labor standards for seed farms supplying Syngenta. It prohibits the use of child labor, while it also reaches out to adults locally – especially women – to create awareness and provide incentives.
These efforts are now bearing fruit. To date, “me & mine” has reached out to nearly 13,000 growers and their families, and has monitored 13,000 farms with nearly 40,000 laborers.
www.syngenta.com/ar2010
“Over the years, Syngenta has continued to refine its Corporate Responsibility policy to address issues that emerged in the seed supply chain. With the involvement of all stakeholders, the company has already brought about significant changes in working conditions in what is a socially challenging environment. And
I am confident that with time and persistence, it will continue to make a difference here.”
Pramod Kulkarni
Regional Production Manager, Syngenta India
Featured above: participants in the “me & mine” program: Sk. Hassina, Technical Farm Laborer (left); Mathurabai Shankar Wagh, Farm Owner (middle); and Mangalabal Sonavane, Technical Farm Laborer (right).
1 Recordable injury and illness rate (IIR) per 200,000 hours according to US OHSA definition
2009
    CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

  34
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Creating our offer
Stewardship
For Syngenta, the responsible and ethical management of all our products – from discovery through to use and ultimate disposal or discontinuation – is a top priority.
For example, over the past nine years, the Small Farmer Syngenta (PAS) Program has been making an impact in the Andean, Caribbean and Central American (ACC) region. In collaboration with local authorities, it has provided over 270,000 small potato and vegetable farmers with basic training in obtaining and sowing the best seeds, using crop protection products safely and effectively, and adopting better agricultural practices.
In June 2010, we collaborated on a training session
for medical staff in Laikipia East – a district in Kenya with 60,000 farmers. Conducted by the Head of the National Poison Center, the session was supported
by the Syngenta Foundation for Sustainable Agriculture through the Agriculture Agri-chemicals Association
of Kenya and the Government of Kenya National Poison Centre (Ministry of Health).
The Seeds business actively applies the Excellence Through Stewardship (ETS) program to our operations. The program promotes responsible management of plant biotechnology, primarily by developing and implementing stewardship practices across the entire life cycle of a product and educating the public about these practices. Syngenta is a founding member of ETS and on the board of directors.
Beyond the safe handling of our products, Syngenta stewardship encompasses making agriculture more sustainable by investing in the environment. We lead many projects that help protect biodiversity and precious natural resources such as water and soil. We comply with all government requirements regarding the management and use of our products, including the International Code of Conduct on the Distribution and Use of Pesticides
Another important area of stewardship is application technology, where product safety and the preservation of the environment remain top priorities. To prevent potential problems with application, customers need to know as much as possible about the interaction between our products, plants, the application devices, and environmental factors like temperature, humidity and wind. We have begun to integrate our expertise into product and service strategies. And we are working closely with many external partners, including spray equipment manufacturers, universities and distributors.
Compliance and risk management
Compliance and risk management are at the heart
of protecting the ongoing value of our business and the safety of our people, our business partners and the communities in which we operate. Syngenta has a formal, coordinated process for actively identifying, mapping, monitoring and controlling risk – whether it is financial, operational, or strategic.
The Syngenta Code of Conduct sets our commitment to ethical, legal, social and environmental responsibility. It outlines our commitment to build and maintain trust in Syngenta, and to integrate our responsibilities in everything we do. We comply with all laws, as well
as national and international codes and conventions, and uphold the principles set out in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Labor Organization’s Core Conventions.
Compliance and risk management are everybody’s responsibility. We have established processes to train and support our employees on compliance matters. Employees are encouraged to report any suspected breaches. Local laws and regulations govern our social and environmental behavior. We set the highest standards for compliance, which are overseen by
the Compliance and Risk Management Committee.
Engaging with stakeholders
We are committed to meeting the expectations we have set for ourselves, as well as delivering on what society expects of us. It matters that our employees and other stakeholders have confidence in us as a worthy partner that can genuinely make a difference by contributing to rural economies and food security.
Syngenta aims to create value with our stakeholders. From a business perspective, we believe that our success depends on honest, open dialogue and collaboration – with other companies, with research institutions, with governments and NGOs.
Most people today agree on the issues around agriculture; the debate centers around the solutions. Syngenta is actively engaged in this debate, both internally and externally, on the way food is produced, stored, processed, distributed and accessed.
We believe that clarity and frank discussion – even around difficult questions – is key to affecting change. We are members of the Sustainability Consortium
and the Keystone Field to Market Initiative, as well as
a range of other sustainability round tables. We are also a member of the World Economic Forum and we actively participate in its work groups for the “New Vision for Agriculture,” and the “Water Initiative.” As a global science-based company, we are increasingly engaged in international forums related to food security, resource efficiency, and the development
of rural economies.
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Product line performance
Crop Protection
Selective Herbicides
Sales
$m
2010 2,308 2009 2,221 2008 2,412
Major brands
AXIAL®, CALLISTO® family, DUAL®/BICEP® MAGNUM, FUSILADE®MAX, TOPIK®
Volume growth was driven in particular by corn herbicides and more than offset lower prices. The CALLISTO® family of products showed growth in all regions, with the main contribution coming from the USA, where early purchases in advance of the 2011 season were testimony to our strong market position. Soybean herbicides also showed a good performance, reflecting their value in combating glyphosate-resistant weeds.
Non-selective Herbicides
Sales
$m
2010 2009 2008
Major brands
GRAMOXONE®, TOUCHDOWN®
35
987
1,141 1,329
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
       Sales were lower mainly due to lower prices for TOUCHDOWN®, in line with developments in the glyphosate market. TOUCHDOWN® volumes, while slightly lower for the full year, recovered sharply in the second half with strong demand in Latin America. GRAMOXONE® volumes also improved in the second half with good growth in Asia Pacific.
Fungicides
Sales
$m
2010 2,662 2009 2,442 2008 2,620
Major brands
ALTO®, AMISTAR®, BRAVO®, REVUS®, RIDOMIL GOLD®, SCORE®, TILT®, UNIX®
Growth in fungicides was driven by AMISTAR®, up 20 percent on the previous year. The main driver was Latin America, where applications on soybean increased. Our market share in Latin America was reinforced with the opening of new azoxystrobin capacity allowing us to satisfy growing demand. In Asia Pacific AMISTAR® sales exceeded $100 million for the first time, with significant further potential as the product’s yield and vigor benefit are increasingly recognized. Strong volume growth in North America almost offset lower prices in the region.
           CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Product line performance 36 Insecticides
Sales
$m
2010 2009 2008
Major brands
ACTARA®, DURIVO®, FORCE®, KARATE®, PROCLAIM®, VERTIMEC®
1,475
1,312 1,423
Professional Products
Sales
$m
2010 470 2009 458 2008 527
Major brands
FAFARD®, HERITAGE®, ICON®
Improving consumer demand led to a recovery in the garden and ornamentals segments with new registrations in Europe also contributing to a strong performance in the region. Turf sales were lower in a competitive North American market.
           The broad spectrum insecticide ACTARA®, used on multiple crops worldwide, continues to grow ten years after its launch; sales in 2010 increased by 25 percent. Sales of the new product DURIVO® more than doubled with its expansion on rice and vegetables in a number of Asian markets and a successful launch on corn and soybean in Brazil.
Seed Care
Sales
$m
2010 838 2009 821 2008 830
Major brands
AVICTA®, CRUISER®, DIVIDEND®, MAXIM®
Seed Care showed strong volume growth particularly in emerging markets, where adoption of the technology is increasing. Sales were lower in North America, where high channel inventories of treated seed and a competitive environment affected CRUISER® and MAXIM®. This was offset by the introduction of AVICTA® on corn in the USA and
by growth in Brazil.
      CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Seeds
Corn and Soybean
Sales
$m
2010 2009 2008
Major brands
AGRISURE®, GARST®, GOLDEN HARVEST®, NK®
Vegetables
Sales
$m
2010 663 2009 594 2008 603
Major brands
DULCINEA®, ROGERS®, S&G®, Zeraim Gedera
A strong start to the year accelerated in the second half, with all regions showing double digit growth. In Europe, the expansion of fresh vegetable sales more than offset a decline in the processing market. Growth in emerging markets was broad based, reflecting the breadth of the portfolio and increased demand for high quality produce.
Flowers
Sales
$m
2010 337 2009 331 2008 337
Major brands
GoldFisch®, Goldsmith Seeds, Yoder®
Flowers showed moderate growth in the two main regions of Europe and North America. This reflected advances in genetics as well as some improvement in the economic environment.
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
37
        1,281
1,210 1,040
    Corn and soybean sales were up by 16 percent adjusting for the impact of advanced sales in the fourth quarter of 2009. Fourth quarter growth, which was on a comparable basis, reflects strong early orders in the USA. Evidence of Syngenta’s product performance and innovation is boosting growth in a buoyant market. Full year sales expanded in all other regions, with particularly strong performances in Eastern Europe and Asia Pacific.
Diverse Field Crops
Sales
$m
2010 524 2009 429 2008 462
Major brands
NK® oilseeds, HILLESHÖG® sugar beet
Diverse Field Crop sales increased significantly on good underlying growth supplemented by acquisitions, which added nine percent to sales. Growth was particularly strong in Eastern Europe, with expansion
in Russia and Ukraine on higher sunflower acreage.
           CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Board of Directors
at December 31, 2010
38
  From left to right
Peggy Bruzelius, Jacques Vincent, Peter Thompson, Martin Taylor, Felix Weber, Michael Mack, Pierre Landolt, Jürg Witmer, David Lawrence, Rolf Watter and Stefan Borgas at Syngenta’s global R&D center for flowers and vegetables in Enkhuizen, The Netherlands.
Membership and qualification
Syngenta is led by a strong and experienced Board. The Board includes representatives from six nationalities, drawn from broad international business and scientific backgrounds. Its members bring diversity in expertise and perspective to the leadership of a complex, highly regulated, global business.
Martin Taylor
Chairman of the Board, non-executive Director. Chairman of the Chairman’s Committee and the Corporate Responsibility Committee, and member of the Compensation Committee. He is also Chairman of the Syngenta Foundation for Sustainable Agriculture
Age: 58. Nationality: British. Appointed: 2000. Term of office: 2011.
Martin Taylor is currently Vice Chairman of RTL Group SA. Previously he was an Advisor to Goldman Sachs International (1999–2005), Chairman of WHSmith plc (1999–2003), and Chief Executive Officer of Barclays plc (1993–1998) and Courtaulds Textiles (1990–1993). He is a member of the British government’s Independent Banking Commission.
Martin Taylor has a degree in oriental languages from Oxford University.
Michael Mack
Chief Executive Officer (CEO), executive Director. Member of the Chairman’s Committee and the Corporate Responsibility Committee
Age: 50. Nationality: American. Appointed: 2008. Term of office: 2013.
Michael Mack was Chief Operating Officer of Seeds (2004–2007) and Head of Crop Protection, NAFTA Region (2002–2004) for Syngenta. Prior to this, he was President of the Global Paper Division of Imerys SA, a French mining and pigments concern, from the time of its merger in 1999 with English China Clays Ltd., where he was Executive Vice President, Americas and Pacific Region, in addition to being an executive Director of the Board. From 1987 to 1996 he held various roles with Mead Corporation. Michael Mack is also Chairman of the Board of the Swiss-American Chamber of Commerce.
Michael Mack has a degree in economics from Kalamazoo College in Michigan, studied at the University of Strasbourg, and has an MBA from Harvard University.
Jürg Witmer
Vice Chairman, non-executive Director. Member of the Chairman’s Committee and of the Compensation Committee Age: 62. Nationality: Swiss. Appointed: 2006. Term of office: 2012. Jürg Witmer is currently Chairman of Givaudan SA and Clariant AG. He joined Roche (1978) in the legal department and subsequently held a number of positions including Assistant to the CEO, General Manager of Roche Far East based in Hong Kong, Head of Corporate Communications and Public Affairs at Roche headquarters in Basel, Switzerland, and General Manager of Roche Austria. He became CEO of Givaudan Roure (1999) and then Chairman of the Board of Directors of Givaudan (2005).
Jürg Witmer has a doctorate in law from the University of Zurich,
as well as a degree in international studies from the University
of Geneva.
Stefan Borgas
Non-executive Director. Member of the Audit Committee
Age: 46. Nationality: German. Appointed: 2009. Term of office: 2012.
Stefan Borgas has been President and Chief Executive Officer of Lonza since June 2004. Prior to joining Lonza, he spent 14 years with BASF Group where he held various leadership positions in Fine Chemicals and Engineering Plastics in the USA, Germany, Ireland and China.
Stefan Borgas holds a degree in Business Administration from the University of Saarbrücken and a Master of Business Administration from the University of St. Gallen. He is member of the Board of SGCI Chemie Pharma Schweiz, the association of Swiss chemical and pharmaceutical industries, of the Swiss-American Chamber of Commerce and of the Swiss Management Gesellschaft (SMG).
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Peggy Bruzelius
Non-executive Director. Chairman of the Audit Committee
Age: 61. Nationality: Swedish. Appointed: 2000. Term of office: 2012.
Peggy Bruzelius is currently Chairman of Lancelot Holding AB.
In addition she serves as Vice Chairman of Electrolux AB and as a Director of Husqvarna AB, Akzo Nobel NV, Axfood AB and Diageo plc. Peggy Bruzelius is a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences. In addition she is a member of the Board of Trustees of the Stockholm School of Economics. Previously she was Executive Vice President of SEB-bank (1997–1998) and
Chief Executive Officer of ABB Financial Services (1991–1997).
Peggy Bruzelius holds a Master of Science from the Stockholm School of Economics and an Honorary Doctorate from the same university.
Pierre Landolt
Non-executive Director. Member of the Corporate Responsibility Committee. He is also a member of the Board of the Syngenta Foundation for Sustainable Agriculture
Age: 63. Nationality: Swiss. Appointed: 2000. Term of office: 2012.
Pierre Landolt is currently Chairman of the Sandoz Family Foundation and a Director of Novartis AG. He is also a partner with unlimited liabilities of the private bank Landolt & Cie. Pierre Landolt serves, in Brazil, as President of the Instituto Fazenda Tamanduá, of the Instituto Estrela de Fomento ao Microcrédito, of AxialPar Ltda and Moco Agropecuaria Ltda, and, in Switzerland, as Chairman of Emasan AG and Vaucher Manufacture Fleurier SA, and as Vice Chairman of Parmigiani Fleurier SA. He is a Director of EcoCarbone SAS, France, and Amazentis SA, Switzerland. He is also Vice Chairman of the Montreux Jazz Festival Foundation.
Peter Thompson
Non-executive Director. Member of the Audit Committee
Age: 64. Nationality: American. Appointed: 2000. Term of office: 2011.
Peter Thompson is currently a Director of Sodexo SA. Previously he was President and Chief Executive Officer of PepsiCo Beverages International (1996–2004), President of PepsiCo Foods International’s Europe, Middle East and Africa Division (1995–1996) and of Walkers Snack Foods in the UK (1994–1995). Before joining PepsiCo he held various senior management roles with Grand Metropolitan plc, including President and Chief Executive Officer of GrandMet Foods Europe (1992–1994), Vice Chairman of The Pillsbury Company (1990–1992), and President and Chief Executive Officer of The Paddington Corporation (1984–1990). He is also Chairman of the Vero Beach Museum of Art.
Peter Thompson has a degree in modern languages from Oxford University and an MBA from Columbia University.
Jacques Vincent
Non-executive Director. Member of the
Compensation Committee
Age: 64. Nationality: French. Appointed: 2005. Term of office: 2013. Jacques Vincent has been Vice Chairman and Chief Operating Officer of the Danone Group, Paris, from 1998 until 2008. He retired from this company in 2010 and sits on the board of various companies, among them Danone, Yakult, Cereplast and Mediaperformance. He began his career with Danone in 1970 and has since held various financial and overall management positions within this group.
Jacques Vincent is a graduate engineer of the Ecole Centrale, Paris. He holds a bachelor in Economics from Paris University and a Master of Science from Stanford University.
Rolf Watter
Non-executive Director. Member of the Chairman’s Committee
Age: 52. Nationality: Swiss. Appointed: 2000. Term of office: 2011.
Rolf Watter has been a partner in the law firm Bär & Karrer in Zurich since 1994. He was a member of its executive board and later an executive Director from 2000 until 2009. He is a non-executive Director of Zurich Financial Services (and its subsidiary Zurich Insurance Company), of Nobel Biocare Holding AG, of UBS Alternative Portfolio AG and A.W. Faber-Castell (Holding) AG.
He was formerly non-executive Chairman of Cablecom Holding (2003–2008), a Director of Centerpulse AG (2002–2003), of Forbo Holding AG (1999–2005) and of Feldschlösschen Getränke AG (2001–2004). In addition, Rolf Watter is a part-time professor at the Law School of the University of Zurich and a member of the SIX Swiss Exchange Regulatory Board and its Disclosure Commission of Experts.
Rolf Watter graduated from the University of Zurich with a doctorate in law and holds an LLM degree from Georgetown University; he is admitted to the Bar of Zurich.
Felix A. Weber
Non-executive Director. Chairman of the Compensation Committee
Age: 60. Nationality: Swiss. Appointed: 2000. Term of office: 2011. Felix A. Weber is currently Executive Committee Co-Chairman of Nomura Switzerland and a Managing Director of Nomura International Ltd. Previously, he was a Director of Publigroupe (2005–2009), a Director of Valora (2006–2008), a Director of Glacier Holdings GP SA and Glacier Holdings S.C.A (former parent entities of Cablecom GmbH) (2003–2005), a Director of Cablecom GmbH (2004–2005), Managing Director of Lehman Brothers Ltd. (2006–2008), Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of Adecco SA (1998–2004), Associate Project Manager and Principal of McKinsey & Company in Zurich (1989–1997), and Chief Executive Officer of Alusuisse South Africa (1982–1984).
39
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
 Pierre Landolt graduated with a Bachelor of Laws from the University of Paris Assas.
David Lawrence
Non-executive Director. Member of the Corporate Responsibility Committee and Chairman of the Science and Technology Advisory Board
Age: 61. Nationality: British. Appointed: 2009. Term of office: 2012.
David Lawrence was Head of Research & Development at Syngenta from September 1, 2002 until the end of September, 2008. Prior to this role, David Lawrence was Head Research & Technology Projects (2000–2002) for Syngenta. Prior to this, he was Head International R&D Projects for Zeneca Agrochemicals, having previously held several senior scientific roles. He is also a member of the BBSRC Council and a Board member for Rothamsted Research, Plastid AS and the UK Biosciences Knowledge Transfer Network for which he chairs the Industrial Biotechnology Group. He is a member of the UK Foresight Lead Expert Group on Food and Farming, and of the UK Industrial Biotechnology Leadership Team.
David Lawrence graduated in chemistry from Oxford University with an MA and DPhil in chemical pharmacology.
Felix A. Weber graduated from the University of St. Gallen with an CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-M0B3A-i1n1operations research and finance and a PhD in marketing.
 
 Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Executive Committee
at December 31, 2010
Members of the
   40
Executive Committee
Under the direction of the
Chief Executive Officer,
the Executive Committee is responsible for the operational management of the Company. It consists of the Chief Executive Officer (CEO), the Chief Operating Officers (COO) of Crop Protection and Seeds,
the Chief Financial Officer (CFO), the Head of Research & Development, the Head of Global Operations, the Head of Business Development and the Head of Legal & Taxes.
       CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Michael Mack
Chief Executive Officer (CEO), executive Director. Member of the Chairman’s Committee and the Corporate Responsibility Committee
Age: 50. Nationality: American. Appointed: 2008.
Michael Mack was Chief Operating Officer of Seeds (2004–2007) and Head of Crop Protection, NAFTA Region (2002–2004) for Syngenta. Prior to this, he was President of the Global Paper Division of Imerys SA, a French mining and pigments concern, from the time of its merger in 1999 with English China Clays Ltd., where he was Executive Vice President, Americas and Pacific Region, in addition to being an executive Director of the Board. From 1987 to 1996 he held various roles with Mead Corporation. Michael Mack is also Chairman of the Board of the Swiss- American Chamber of Commerce.
Michael Mack has a degree in economics from Kalamazoo College in Michigan, studied at the University of Strasbourg, and has an MBA from Harvard University.
Alejandro Aruffo
Head of Research & Development
Age: 51. Nationality: Italian/American. Appointed: 2008.
Alejandro Aruffo was Vice President Global Pharmaceutical Development, Abbott (2005–2008), President Abbott Bioresearch Center and Vice President Abbott Immunology Research and Development (2003–2005), President Abbott Bioresearch Center and Divisional Vice President Abbott Immunology Research (2002–2003), Vice President Cardiovascular and Metabolic Disease Drug Discovery (2001–2002), and Vice President Immunology Drug Discovery (1998–2001) for Bristol-Myers Squibb. Prior to these roles he held various positions at Bristol-Myers Squibb.
He graduated from the University of Washington with BSc degrees in chemistry and mathematics and from Harvard University with a PhD in biophysics.
John Atkin
Chief Operating Officer Crop Protection
Age: 57. Nationality: British. Appointed: 2000.
John Atkin was Chief Executive Officer (1999–2000), Chief Operating Officer (1999), Head of Product Portfolio Management (1998), and Head of Insecticides and Patron for Asia (1997–1998) of Novartis Crop Protection. Prior to 1998 he was General Manager of Sandoz Agro France (1995–1997) and Head of Sandoz Agro Northern Europe (1993–1995). In 2008 he was appointed Visiting Professor at the Institute for Research on Environment and Sustainability (IRES) at the University of Newcastle upon Tyne. He is also Chairman of CropLife’s Crop Protection Strategy Council (global industry association).
He graduated from the University of Newcastle upon Tyne with a PhD and a BSc degree in agricultural zoology.
Robert Berendes
Head of Business Development
Age: 45. Nationality: German. Appointed: 2007.
Robert Berendes was Head of Diverse Field Crops (2005–2006) and Head of Strategy, Planning and M&A (2002–2005) for Syngenta. Prior to this, he was a partner and co-leader of the European chemical practice at McKinsey & Company.
He graduated from the University of Cologne with a diploma in chemistry and has a PhD in biophysics from the Max-Planck- Institute for Biochemistry/Technical University of Munich.
Christoph Mäder
Head of Legal & Taxes and Company Secretary
Age: 51. Nationality: Swiss. Appointed: 2000.
Christoph Mäder was Head of Legal & Public Affairs for Novartis Crop Protection (1999–2000) and Senior Corporate Counsel for Novartis International AG (1992–1998). He is Chairman of SGCI Chemie Pharma Schweiz, the association of Swiss chemical and pharmaceutical industries. He is also a member of the Executive Committee of the Board of economiesuisse, the main umbrella organization representing the Swiss economy and of the Executive Board of the Business and Industry Advisory Committee (BIAC) to the Organization for Economic Co- operation and Development (OECD).
He graduated from Basel University Law School, and is admitted to the Bar in Switzerland.
Mark Peacock
Head of Global Operations
Age: 49. Nationality: British. Appointed: 2007.
Mark Peacock was previously Head of Global Supply (2003–2006) and Regional Supply Manager for Asia Pacific (2000–2003) for Syngenta. Prior to this he was a Product Manager in Zeneca Agrochemicals and General Manager of the Electrophotography Business in Zeneca Specialties.
He has a degree in chemical engineering from Imperial College, London, and a Masters in international management from McGill University in Montreal.
Davor Pisk
Chief Operating Officer Seeds
Age: 52. Nationality: British. Appointed: 2008.
Davor Pisk was Region Head Crop Protection Asia Pacific (2003–2007) for Syngenta and Region Head Asia for Zeneca Agrochemicals (1998–2001). Prior to 1998, he was Head of Herbicides for Zeneca (1993–1997) and General Manager of ICI Czechoslovakia (1991–1993).
He has a BA in Economics and Politics from Exeter University, UK, and an MA in Political Science from the University of California, USA.
John Ramsay
Chief Financial Officer
Age: 53. Nationality: British. Appointed: 2007.
John Ramsay was Group Financial Controller (2000–2007) for Syngenta. Prior to that, he was Zeneca Agrochemicals Finance Head Asia Pacific (1994–1999), Financial Controller ICI Malaysia (1990–1993), and ICI Plant Protection Regional Controller Latin America (1987–1990). Before joining ICI in 1984, he worked in Audit and Tax at KPMG.
He is a Chartered Accountant and also holds an honors degree in finance and accounting.
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
41
  CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

  42
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Financial information
A summary of Syngenta’s consolidated financial statements is provided on pages 42 to 49. For full details and analysis of the Group’s audited financial results, prepared in accordance with IFRS, please refer to our comprehensive Financial Report which is available on request or on our website www.syngenta.com/ir
References to EBITDA in the following financial information excludes the impact of restructuring, impairment and discontinued operations1.
Summarized financial information 2010 and 2009
For the year ended December 31 ($m, except per share amounts)
Sales
Gross profit
Marketing and distribution
Research and development
General and administrative
Restructuring and impairment
Income before taxes
Income tax expense Attributable to minority interests
Attributable to Syngenta AG shareholders:
Earnings/(loss) per share ($)2
– Basic
– Diluted
Gross profit margin excluding restructuring and impairment
Excluding restructuring and impairment1
Restructuring and
impairment As reported under IFRS
  2010
11,641
5,793
(1,892)
(1,032)
(899)
– 1,855
(317) (5)
1,533
16.54
16.44
2010
49.8%
2009
10,992 5,437
(1,805)
(952)
(714)
– 1,843
(325) (3)
1,515
16.26
16.15
2010 2009 2010
– – 11,641 (18) (17) 5,775
– – (1,892)
– – (1,032)
– – (899)
(159) (130) (159) (178) (149) 1,677
42 42 (275) – – (5)
(136) (107) 1,397
(1.47) (1.15) 15.07
(1.45) (1.14) 14.99
2009
10,992 5,420
(1,805)
(952)
(714)
(130) 1,694
(283) (3)
1,408
15.11
15.01
            Operating income
  1,970
  1,966
  (177)
  (147)
  1,793
  1,819
    Net income
  1,538
  1,518
  (136)
  (107)
  1,402
  1,411
        EBITDA4 2,505
2010 2009 CER3
49.5% 49.7%
2,427
22.1% 21.9%
17.6%
528
36%
28% 1,802 13%
 EBITDA margin
Tax rate on results excluding restructuring and impairment
Free cash flow5
Trade working capital as a percentage of 12-month sales
Debt/Equity gearing6
Net debt6
Cash flow return on investment7
21.5%
17.1%
1,129
33%
20%
1,473
13%
                   1 For further discussion of restructuring and impairment charges, see page 48. Net income and earnings per share excluding restructuring and impairment are provided as additional information and not as an alternative to net income and earnings per share determined in accordance with IFRS
2 The weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue used to calculate the earnings per share were as follows: For 2010 basic EPS 92,687,903 and diluted 93,225,303; for 2009 basic EPS 93,154,537 and diluted 93,760,196
3 For a description of CER, see page 48
4 EBITDA is defined on page 48
5 2009 free cash flow has been restated to reflect the change in definition of free cash flow implemented by Syngenta during 2010. For a description of free cash flow and details of the change in
definition, page 48
6 For a description of net debt and the calculation of debt/equity gearing, see page 48
7 Syngenta has implemented the cash flow return on investment measure for the first time in 2010. For a description of the calculation, see page 48
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Full year product line and regional sales
Year ended December 31
Syngenta
Crop Protection
Seeds
Business Development Inter-segment elimination
Crop Protection Product line
Selective Herbicides Non-selective Herbicides Fungicides
Insecticides
Seed Care Professional Products Others
Regional
Europe, Africa and Middle East NAFTA
Latin America
Asia Pacific
Seeds
Product line
Corn and Soybean Diverse Field Crops
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
43
   CER1 $m $m % %
2010 2009 Actual
    8,878 8,491 +5 +3
2,805 2,564 +9 +8
23 8 +197 +197
(65) (71) n/a n/a
       Third Party Sales
  11,641
  10,992
  +6
  +4
      2,308
987
2,662
1,475
838
470
138
2,649
2,383
2,300
1,546
1,281
524
2,221 +4 +1
1,141 -13 -16
2,442 +9 +7
1,312 +12 +11
821 +2 +2
458 +3 –
96 +43 +43
2,667 -1 -1
2,567 -7 -10
1,907 +21 +21
1,350 +15 +8
1,210 +6 +4
429 +22 +18
594 +12 +11
331 +2 +2
933 +12 +10
1,187 +4 +3
243 +13 +13
201 +24 +18
             Total
  8,878
  8,491
  +5
  +3
          Total
  8,878
  8,491
  +5
  +3
         Vegetables 663
Flowers 337
Regional
Europe, Africa and Middle East 1,047
NAFTA 1,234
   Total
  2,805
  2,564
  +9
  +8
       Latin America Asia Pacific
1 For a description of CER, see page 48
275
249
   Total
  2,805
  2,564
  +9
  +8
  CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

  44
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Financial information
Condensed consolidated income statement
Year ended December 31 ($m, except share and per share amounts)
Sales
Cost of goods sold
Marketing and distribution Research and development General and administrative Restructuring and impairment
Income/(loss) from associates and joint ventures Financial expenses, net
Income tax expense
Attributable to:
– Minority interests
– Syngenta AG shareholders
Earnings per share (US$): – Basic
– Diluted
Weighted average number of shares: –Basic
–Diluted
  2010
11,641
(5,866) (1,892)
(1,032)
(899)
(159) 25
(141) (275)
5
1,397
15.07
14.99
92,687,903
93,225,303
20091
10,992
(5,572) (1,805)
(952)
(714)
(130) (3)
(122) (283)
3
1,408
15.11
15.01
93,154,537
93,760,196
     Gross profit
  5,775
  5,420
         Operating income
  1,793
  1,819
    Income before taxes
  1,677
  1,694
  Net income
  1,402
  1,411
      Net income
  1,402
  1,411
             1 After effect of accounting policy change for post-employment benefits described in Note 2 to the Syngenta Group consolidated financial statements in the Financial Report 2010, which is available on our website at www.syngenta.com/ir
All amounts relate to continuing operations
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Restructuring and impairment before taxes
Year ended December 31 ($m) Cash costs:
Operational efficiency programs Integration and acquisition costs Other restructuring costs
Non-cash restructuring and impairment, net
1 $18 million (2009: $17 million) is included within cost of goods sold and $1 million (2009: $2 million) is included within income/(loss) from associates and joint ventures
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
45
   2010 2009
101 98
19 28
14 – 44 23
           134
  126
   Total restructuring and impairment before taxes1
  178
  149
  CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

  46
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Financial information
Condensed consolidated balance sheet
At December 31 ($m)
Assets
Current assets:
Cash and cash equivalents Trade receivables
Other accounts receivable
  2010 20091
1,967 1,552
2,554 2,506
626 558
            Inventories 3,844
3,922
156
200
2,738
3,102
747
248
400
(2,468)
(281)
(376)
(145)
(827)
(214)
(3,527)
(688)
(1,116)
(6,473)
(14)
  Derivative and other financial assets Other current assets
Non-current assets:
Property, plant and equipment Intangible assets
Deferred tax assets
Derivative financial assets
Other non-current financial assets
Liabilities and equity Current liabilities:
Trade accounts payable Current financial debt Income taxes payable Derivative financial liabilities Other current liabilities
502
223
2,964
3,087
824
176
518
(2,590)
(992)
(406)
(291)
(846)
   Total current assets
  9,716
  8,894
             Total non-current assets
  7,569
  7,235
 Total assets
 17,285
 16,129
               Provisions (228)
Non-current liabilities:
Financial debt and other non-current liabilities (2,786)
Deferred tax liabilities (813)
Provisions (884)
 Total current liabilities
  (5,353)
  (4,311)
        Total non-current liabilities
  (4,483)
  (5,331)
 Total liabilities
 (9,836)
 (9,642)
 Equity:
Shareholders’ equity (7,439)
Minority interests (10)
     Total equity
  (7,449)
  (6,487)
 Total liabilities and equity
 (17,285)
 (16,129)
 1 After effect of accounting policy change for post-employment benefits described in Note 2 to the Syngenta Group consolidated financial statements in the Financial Report 2010, which is available on our website at www.syngenta.com/ir
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Condensed consolidated cash flow statement
Year ended December 31 ($m)
Income before taxes
Reversal of non-cash items
Cash (paid)/received in respect of:
Interest and other financial receipts Interest and other financial payments Income taxes
Restructuring costs
Contributions to pension plans, excluding restructuring costs Other provisions
Change in net working capital:
Change in inventories
Change in trade and other accounts receivable and other net current assets Change in trade and other accounts payable
Additions to property, plant and equipment
Proceeds from disposals of property, plant and equipment Purchases of intangible assets
Purchases of investments in associates and other financial assets Proceeds from disposals of financial assets
Net cash flows from (purchases)/disposals of marketable securities Acquisitions and divestments
Increases in third party interest-bearing debt
Repayments of third party interest-bearing debt Sale/(purchase) of treasury shares and options over own shares Acquisitions of non-controlling interests
Dividends paid
Net effect of currency translation on cash and cash equivalents
Net change in cash and cash equivalents
available on our website at www.syngenta.com/ir
Free cash flow
Year ended December 31 ($m)
Cash flow from operating activities
Cash flow used for investing activities
Cash flow (from)/used for marketable securities
Cash flow used for acquisitions of non-controlling interests
Cash flow from foreign exchange movements and settlement of hedges of inter-company loans
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
47
   2010 20091
1,677 1,694
805 615
144 96
(308) (380)
(268) (165)
(38) (79)
(335) (125)
(95) (81)
108 (178)
(129) 55
146 (33)
(396) (652)
13 33
(118) (97)
(12) (22)
42 87
31 (41)
(10) (188)
139 926
(165) (183)
(246) (79)
(48) –
(524) (494)
2 40
415 749
1,552 803 1 After effect of accounting policy change for post-employment benefits described in Note 2 to the Syngenta Group consolidated financial statements in the Financial Report 2010, which is
                   Cash flow before change in net working capital
  1,582
  1,575
         Cash flow from operating activities
  1,707
  1,419
              Cash flow used for investing activities
  (450)
  (880)
          Cash flow from financing activities
  (844)
  170
     Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the year
 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year
  1,967
  1,552
   2010 2009
1,707 1,419
(450) (880)
(31) 41
(48) –
(49) (52)
           Free cash flow
  1,129
  528
   CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

  48
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Financial information
Constant exchange rates (CER)
Results in this report from one period to another period are, where appropriate, compared using constant exchange rates (CER). To present that information, current period results for entities reporting in currencies other than US dollars are converted into US dollars at the prior period’s exchange rates, rather than at the exchange rates for the current year. CER margin percentages for gross profit and EBITDA are calculated by the ratio of these measures to sales after restating the measures and sales at prior period exchange rates. The CER presentation indicates the underlying business performance before taking into account currency exchange fluctuations.
EBITDA
EBITDA is defined as earnings before interest, tax, minority interests, depreciation, amortization, restructuring and impairment. Information concerning EBITDA has been included as it is used by management and by investors as a supplementary measure of operating performance and is used by Syngenta as the basis of part of its employee incentive schemes. Management excludes restructuring from EBITDA in order to focus on results excluding items affecting comparability from one period to the next. EBITDA is not a measure of cash liquidity or financial performance under generally accepted accounting principles and the EBITDA measures used by Syngenta may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies. EBITDA should not be construed as an alternative to operating income or cash flow as determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
Restructuring and impairment before taxes
Restructuring represents the effect on reported performance of initiating business changes which are considered major and which, in the opinion of management, will have a material effect on the nature and focus of Syngenta’s operations, and therefore requires separate disclosure to provide a more thorough understanding of business performance. Restructuring includes the effects of completing and integrating significant business combinations and divestments. Restructuring and impairment includes the impairment costs associated with major restructuring and also impairment losses and reversals of impairment losses resulting from major changes in the markets in which a reported segment operates.
The incidence of these business changes may be periodic and the effect on reported performance of initiating them will vary from period to period. Because each such business change is different in nature and scope, there will be little continuity in the detailed composition and size of the reported amounts which affect performance in successive periods. Separate disclosure of these amounts facilitates the understanding of performance including and excluding items affecting comparability. Reported performance before restructuring and impairment is one
of the measures used in Syngenta’s short-term employee incentive compensation plans. Syngenta’s definition of restructuring and impairment may not be comparable to similarly titled line items in financial statements of other companies.
Free cash flow
Free cash flow comprises cash flow from operating and investing activities: excluding investments in and proceeds from marketable securities, which are included in investing activities; excluding cash flows from and used for foreign exchange movements and settlement of related hedges on inter-company loans, which are included in operating activities; and including cash flows from acquisitions of non-controlling interests, which are included in financing activities.
During 2010, Syngenta changed its definition of free cash flow to exclude cash flows from or used for foreign exchange movements and settlement of hedges of inter-company loans because it believes this revised free cash flow measure is more independent of a group’s internal funding structure and therefore more easily comparable with that of companies with less centralized funding structures than Syngenta’s. 2009 free cash flow has been restated.
Free cash flow is not a measure of financial performance under generally accepted accounting principles and the free cash flow measure used by Syngenta may not be identical to similarly titled measures of other companies. Free cash flow has been included as it is used by many investors as a useful supplementary measure of cash generation.
Net debt reconciliation
Net debt comprises total debt net of related hedging derivatives, cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities. Net debt is not a measure of financial position under generally accepted accounting principles and the net debt measure used by Syngenta may not be comparable to the similarly titled measure of other companies. Net debt has been included as it is used by many investors as a useful measure of financial position and risk. The following table presents the derivation of the debt/equity gearing ratio:
 ($m)
Net debt
Shareholders’ equity
Debt/equity gearing ratio (%)
Cash flow return on investment
2010 2009
1,473 1,802
7,439 6,473
20% 28%
    Cash flow return on investment is a new measure implemented by Syngenta in 2010 in order to compare cash returns to average invested capital. Gross cash flow comprises cash flow before change in net working capital, excluding interest and other financial receipts and payments. In 2010, the accelerated contributions to the defined benefit pension plans of US$200 million were also excluded. Invested capital comprises: total current assets, excluding cash and derivative and other financial assets; total non-current assets, excluding non-current derivative and other financial assets and defined benefit pension assets, and adjusted to reflect gross book values of property, plant and equipment and intangible assets; total current liabilities, excluding derivative financial liabilities and current financial debt; and deferred tax liabilities.
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Full year segmental results excluding restructuring and impairment
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
49
   Year ended December 31, 2010 ($m)
Sales
Gross profit
Marketing and distribution Research and development General and administrative
Year ended December 31, 2009 ($m)
Sales
Gross profit
Marketing and distribution Research and development General and administrative
Crop Protection
8,878
4,382
(1,321)
(555)
(667)
Crop Protection
8,491
4,229
(1,255)
(508)
(496)
Seeds
2,805
1,373
(559)
(410)
(217)
Seeds
2,564
1,220
(540)
(364)
(199)
Business Inter-segment Development elimination
23 (65)
12 26
(12) –
(67) –
(15) –
Business Inter-segment Development elimination
8 (71)
(7) (5)
Fullyear 2010
11,641
5,793
(1,892)
(1,032)
(899)
Full year 2009
10,992
5,437
           Operating income
 1,839
 187
 (82)
 26
 1,970
 EBITDA
  2,194
  357
  (72)
  26
  2,505
 EBITDA (%)
 24.7
 12.7
 n/a
 –
 21.5
          (10) – (1,805)
(80) – (952)
(19) – (714)
     Operating income
 1,970
 117
 (116)
 (5)
 1,966
 EBITDA
  2,282
  256
  (106)
  (5)
  2,427
 EBITDA (%)
 26.9
 10.0
 n/a
 –
 22.1
  Reconciliation of segment EBITDA to segment operating income excluding restructuring and impairment
  Year ended December 31, 2010 ($m)
EBITDA
Depreciation, amortization and impairment Income from associates and joint ventures
Year ended December 31, 2009 ($m)
EBITDA
Depreciation, amortization and impairment Income from associates and joint ventures
Crop Business Inter-segment Protection Seeds Development elimination
2,194 357 (72) 26
Total
2,505
(509)
(26)
Total
2,427
(462)
1
    (348)
(7)
Crop Protection
2,282
(321)
9
(151) (10) –
(19) – –
Business Inter-segment Seeds Development elimination
256 (106) (5)
(131) (10) –
(8) – –
   Operating income excluding restructuring and impairment
  1,839
  187
  (82)
  26
  1,970
           Operating income excluding restructuring and impairment
  1,970
  117
  (116)
  (5)
  1,966
   CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

  50
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Corporate Responsibility performance summary
A summary of Syngenta’s performance in the areas of resource efficiency, stewardship, people, environment and compliance is presented on pages50–53.Theenvironmentalperformancenumbershavebeennormalizedto$EBIT1 tobetterrelateourperformanceintheseareastovalue creation. To view a more detailed report, please visit the Annual Report website www.syngenta.com/ar2010
Resource efficient programs
Our programs teach growers how to use sustainable agriculture techniques for managing natural resources in
the most efficient and responsible way,
e.g. reducing the
water needed for crop cultivation, minimizing
soil erosion and improving productivity for efficient land use.
Stewardship
Syngenta aims to maximize benefits and minimize negative impacts throughout the lifecycle
of its products.
We adopt strict measures to ensure the safety of our chemical products and biotechnology, and we audit suppliers to ensure they meet our HSE and labor standards. Training on the safe and effective use of our products helps growers get the most benefit from them.
Soil, water, biodiversity, IPM/ICM, safe use2
EAME NAFTA LATAM APAC
Active programs
Read more about resource efficient programs
Product stewardship
EAME NAFTA LATAM APAC
Active training programs
Number of countries participating in adverse health incident management system
Product stewardship – biotechnology and regulatory compliance
Number of trial locations requiring a permit Number of trial inspections performed by Syngenta
Read more about stewardship
1 Excluding restructuring and impairment
2 Starting 2009, reporting year October 1 to September 30
3 In 2010 1.1 million (2009: 1.7 million) from farmer contest televised training
2010 2009 41.5% 29.0%
20.7% 24.8%
19.5% 26.8%
18.3% 19.4%
182 177
2008 40.6%
29.0%
16.8%
13.6%
163
   Total investment ($m)
  7.57
  7.03
  8.13
            www.syngenta.com/ar2010
2010 2009 2008 0.5% 0.4% 1.6%
0.1% 0.0% 0.2%
4.0% 8.3% 23.2%
95.4% 91.3% 75.0%
90 129 119
84 50 45
435 471 420
237 189 168
www.syngenta.com/ar2010
    Number of people trained (m)3
  4.27
  3.94
  2.39
               Number of employees completing regulatory compliance training
  1,593
  1,177
  782
       CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 People
Syngenta operates around the globe,
and has a rich mix
of employees from backgrounds that reflect our diverse markets. We believe this diversity is an asset to the Company, and we have programs to ensure all employees are given
an equal opportunity.
The safety of our staff
is a priority. We provide
a healthy and motivating work environment and offer competitive rewards, which help attract and retain the most talented individuals. To help them achieve their career aspirations, employees are encouraged to
fulfill their potential with training/development programs, and
regular discussions
with line managers.
Responding to feedback from employees helps us improve our business and, in turn, ensures they are proud to work for Syngenta. Sites respond to employee feedback through local programs and share best practices through our online database.
People retention
EAME NAFTA LATAM APAC
Part-time employees Turnover rate
Turnover rate <35 years Turnover rate 35–50 years Turnover rate >50 years
Employees entitled to participate in Employee Share Purchase Plan (ESPP) Entitled employees participating in ESPP
Employees participating in Long-term Incentive (LTI) plan
Diversity
Female employees
In management roles In senior management
Proportion of senior management from each region
2008 51
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
   2010 2009
12,466 12,565 11,471
 Employees as of December 311
  26,179
  25,925
  24,148
    5,022 5,214 5,076
4,004 3,782 3,610
4,687 4,364 3,991
850 763 716
9.5% 9.3% 9.8%
3.6% 3.2% 3.8%
3.7% 3.2% 3.9%
2.2% 3.0% 2.0%
16,262 15,829 13,821
46% 48% 49%
1,031 1,016 886
32% 30% 28%
20% 20% 19%
11% 11% 12%
                               Number of senior managers
  196
  196
  190
 EAME2 63% 64% 64%
NAFTA 19% 20% 22%
LATAM 8% 7% 6%
APAC 10% 9% 9%
        Number of nationalities in senior management
Employee development
24 24 22
   Total training investment ($m)
  29.0
  24.9
  27.2
 EAME2 18.4 16.3 16.6
NAFTA 4.1 2.5 3.4
LATAM 3.3 3.1 3.6
APAC 3.1 3.0 3.6
        Training investment per employee (US$)
Health and safety
Recordable injury rate per 200,000 hours3 EAME
NAFTA LATAM APAC
EAME NAFTA LATAM APAC
First aid cases
Economic value shared
1,109 962 1,126
0.37 0.38 0.47
0.43 0.47 0.46
0.66 0.58 0.98
0.22 0.19 0.19
0.18 0.19 0.24
0.01 0.05 0.04
0.06 0.06 0.03
0 0.03 0.06
   Recordable injury and illness rate (IIR) per 200,000 hours3
  0.39
  0.42
  0.50
          Recordable occupational illness rate per 200,000 hours3
  0.02
  0.03
  0.03
       0.01 0
820 712
0
421
     Corporate community investment ($m)4
  16.7
  17.5
  10.8
 Salaries ($m)5
 2,305
 2,176
 2,157
 Read more about people   www.syngenta.com/ar2010
1 Permanent full-time equivalent (FTE)
2 Including Headquarters (Switzerland)
3 According to US OHSA definition for injuries and illness
4 $0.8 million from resource efficient programs
5 After effect of accounting policy change for post-employment benefits described in Note 2 to the Syngenta Group consolidated financial statements
in the Financial Report 2010, which is available on our website at www.syngenta.com
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Corporate Responsibility performance summary
52 Environment Managing the
environmental impacts
of our operations is a
key element of our health, safety and environment (HSE) strategy. The global coordination of
our program is supported by local initiatives to minimize the impact of our operations on climate change, air quality and water resources.
We monitor energy use to identify opportunities to improve efficiency. Our energy strategy encourages local teams to select the best ways to reduce energy at local sites. By 2012, we aim to decrease global greenhouse gas emissions by 40 percent relative to EBIT from the 2006 baseline.
Sites also have programs to cut water use and minimize generation of effluent and waste. Local targets aim to increase recycling and cut the amount of waste sent
to landfill.
The environmental performance reporting system was updated
in 2010. For more information visit www.syngenta.com/ar2010
Energy 2010 MJ/$EBIT 4.08
2009 2008 4.36 4.19
    Energy (TJ)
  8,031
  8,334
  8,653
    Gas (TJ) Electricity (TJ) Steam (TJ) Others (TJ) Oil (TJ)
Number of sites setting energy targets
Greenhouse gases
kg /$EBIT
Within direct control:
CO2e emissions from own operations (000’s tonnes) of which: CO2 (000’s tonnes)
CO2 emissions from company vehicles (000’s tonnes) Within indirect control:
CO2e emissions from purchased energy (000’s tonnes) CO2 emissions from business trips (000’s tonnes)
CO2 emissions from distribution (000’s tonnes)
3,851 3,675 4,074
1,963 2,096 2,262
935 1,153 1,076
652 775 940
631 635 301
22 19 20
0.66 0.76 0.75
616 641 701
329 426 467
68 65 54
301 418 426
20 25 32
299 303 329
             Total CO2e emissions (000’s tonnes)
  1,304
  1,452
  1,542
                   Other air emissions1
g/$EBIT 0.64
0.51 0.53
 Total other air emissions (tonnes)
  1,269
  980
  1,100
    NOx (tonnes)
Non-halogenated VOCs (tonnes) Halogenated VOCs (tonnes) Particulates (tonnes)
SO2 (tonnes)
NH3 (tonnes)
HCL (tonnes)
404 416 644
440 415 308
48 49 23
123 63 82
208 20 20
23 7 8
23 10 15
               Water
liters/$EBIT 14.6
16.7 15.1
 Water consumption (million cubic meters)
  28.8
  32.0
  31.1
   Cooling (million cubic meters)
Processing and washing (million cubic meters) Others (million cubic meters)
Product ingredient (million cubic meters) Sewage and sanitary (million cubic meters) Read more about environment
1 Starting 2010, all ‘other air emissions’ numbers are based on measurements
18.6 21.0 19.5
8.0 7.1 8.1
0.9 2.0 1.5
0.2 0.2 0.3
1.1 1.7 1.7
www.syngenta.com/ar2010
            CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Environment continued
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Waste water effluents 2010 2009 2008 53
    Total industrial waste water discharge (million cubic meters)
  8.8
  10
  10.6
  liters/$EBIT 4.5
of which: total organic carbon (TOC) (tonnes) 769
chemical oxygen demand (COD) (tonnes) 2,336
biological oxygen demand (BOD) (tonnes) 240
total suspended solids (tonnes) 393
soluble salts discharged (000’s tonnes) 114
Direct discharge of uncontaminated cooling water (million cubic meters) 18.5
Waste
kg/$EBIT 0.10
5.2 5.1
783 725
2,677 2,358
234 225
303 262
123 132
20.8 19.3
0.09 0.07
               Hazardous waste (000’s tonnes)
  198.7
  173.9
  153.3
   of which: recycled/re-used (000’s tonnes) incinerated (000’s tonnes)
landfill (000’s tonnes)
other (000’s tonnes)
kg/$EBIT
of which: recycled/re-used (000’s tonnes) incinerated (000’s tonnes)
landfill (000’s tonnes)
other (000’s tonnes)
Number of sites with reduction programs
Environmental compliance
64.0 51.4 47.5
124.0 97.1 84.3
0.4 0.7 1.5
10.3 24.7 20.0
0.07 0.06 0.06
76.6 66.4 72.1
18.0 25.2 19.3
28.7 15.5 22.8
10.4 16.9 6.0
19 19 19
       Non-hazardouse waste (000’s tonnes)
  133.7
  124.0
  120.2
               Significant unplanned releases1
  0
  0
  2
 Read more about environment   www.syngenta.com/ar2010
Compliance
The Syngenta Code
of Conduct sets our commitment to ethical, social and environmental responsibility, including human rights and fair labor practices. Employees are encouraged to report any suspected breaches. Local laws and regulations govern our environmental behavior, and we have stringent HSE management systems to ensure compliance. We set
high standards for animal welfare and audit compliance.
Corporate conduct
EAME 28%
  2010 2009 2008
17% 19%
 Cases reported through the compliance helpline
  78
  76
  31
    NAFTA LATAM APAC
Health, safety, environment and social compliance in supply Animal welfare
Number of instances of non-compliance found
Read more about compliance
13% 26% 19%
5% 15% 23%
54% 42% 39%
0 0 0
www.syngenta.com/ar2010
       Number of seed supply farms included in Syngenta/FLA monitoring
  12,395
  8,169
  2,312
 Number of HSEQ assessments at chemical suppliers
 70
 65
 59
  Number of audits performed in contract laboratories
  6
  3
  6
    1 Releases that escape beyond the site boundary and that cause either environmental impact and/or concern from neighbors, regulators, etc
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 54
Syngenta share price performance December 31, 2007 – December 31, 2010 CHF 200.40
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
Shareholder information
Syngenta shares are listed on the SIX Swiss Exchange and
on the New York Stock Exchange, where the shares are
traded as ADS (American Depositary Shares).1 30
       Trading symbols
Shares
Shares in issue
At December 31, 2010
Total shares in issue
of which treasury shares
Share price and market capitalization2
At December 31, 2010
Share price (CHF)
Share price (USD) (ADS)
Market capitalization (CHF million)
Market capitalization (USD million)
Dividend history
2006
2007
2008
2009
20 10
  SIX Swiss New York Stock Exchange Exchange
  SYNN SYT 0
     Number of shares
–10 –20
  94,599,849 –30
2,392,751
273.50
58.78
25,219
26,916
Dividend CHF
3.80
4.80
6.00
6.00
  –40
–50
–60
       Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec 2007 2008 2009 2010
Syngenta SMI Eurotop 300
Syngenta ADS price performance December 31, 2007 – December 31, 2010
         40 30 20 10
0 –10 –20 –30 –40 –50
–60
USD 39.14
CHF 290.70
Dec 31, 2010 CHF 273.50
 USD 56.27
Dec 31, 2010 USD 58.78
         20103 7.00
Total shareholder return4
%
2006 40.7
2007 29.4
           2008
–29.5
  2009 48.6
 2010
–3.9
Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec
  1 1share=5ADS
2 For the purposes of calculating market capitalization the number of shares
stood at 92.207 million
3 To be submitted for shareholder approval at the Annual General Meeting
on April 19, 2011
4 Calculated as return on ordinary shares plus reinvested dividends
2007 2008
Syngenta ADS Dow Jones S&P 500
Reporting dates
First quarter trading statement
Annual General Meeting
Half-year results
Third quarter trading statement
2009 2010
April 15, 2011
April 19, 2011
July 22, 2011
October 14, 2011
      A full form 20-F is accessible at: www.syngenta.com/ir
Investors can subscribe to Financial Releases via RSS at: www.syngenta.com/ir
The full-year results press release can be viewed up to six months after the event at: www.syngenta.com/fyr2010
 CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

 Independent Assurance Report on the Syngenta Corporate Responsibility Reporting
To the Head of Legal and Taxes, Syngenta International AG, Basel (‘Syngenta’):
We have performed assurance procedures to provide assurance on the following aspects of the 2010 Corporate Responsibility (CR) reporting of Syngenta.
Subject matter
Data and information disclosed with the CR reporting of Syngenta and its consolidated subsidiaries, for the financial year ended December 31, 2010 on the following aspects:
– The application of the Syngenta internal Health, Safety and Environment (HSE) and Corporate Community Investment (CCI) reporting guidelines to the CR reporting;
– The internal reporting system and procedures, including the control environment, to collect and aggregate CR data; and
– The CR Performance Summary disclosed on pages 50 to 53 of the Syngenta Annual Review 2010.
Our assurance procedures do not cover the indicator on Salaries in the Performance Summary on page 51 of the Annual Review.
Criteria
– The Syngenta internal Health, Safety and Environment (HSE) and Corporate Community Investment (CCI) reporting guidelines; and
– The defined procedures by which the CR data are gathered, collated and aggregated internally.
Responsibility and Methodology
The accuracy and completeness of CR performance indicators are subject to inherent limitations given their nature and methods for determining, calculating and estimating such data. Our assurance report should therefore be read in connection with Syngenta’s internal guidelines, definitions and procedures on
the reporting of its CR performance.
The Board of Directors of Syngenta is responsible
for both the subject matter and the criteria. Our responsibility is to provide a conclusion on the subject matter based on our assurance procedures in accordance with the International Standard on Assurance Engagements (ISAE) 3000.
Main Assurance Procedures 55 Our assurance procedures included the following work:
– Evaluation of the application of group guidelines Reviewing the application of the Syngenta internal HSE and CCI reporting guidelines;
– Site visits
Visiting the regional site of Syngenta’s Crop Protection and Seeds Business Units in Singapore and two selected sites of Syngenta’s Seeds Business Unit in Thailand. The selection was based on quantitative and qualitative criteria;
Interviewing personnel responsible for internal reporting and data collection at the sites we visited and at the Group level;
– Assessment of the performance indicators Performing tests on a sample basis of evidence supporting the CR Performance Summary relative to completeness, accuracy, adequacy and consistency;
– Review of the documentation
Reviewing the relevant documentation on a sample basis, including management and reporting structures and documentation;
– Assessment of the processes and data consolidation Reviewing the appropriateness of the management and reporting processes for CR reporting; and
Assessing the consolidation process of data at the Group level.
Conclusions
In our opinion
– The internal HSE and CCI guidelines are being applied properly; and
– The internal reporting system and procedures to collect and aggregate CR data are functioning as designed and provide an appropriate basis for its disclosure.
Based on our work described in this report, nothing has come to our attention that causes us to believe that the data and information mentioned in the subject matter and disclosed with the Corporate Responsibility reporting in the Syngenta Annual Review 2010 does not give a fair picture of Syngenta’s performance in the area of Corporate Responsibility.
PricewaterhouseCoopers AG Zurich, February 11, 2011
Dr. Thomas Scheiwiller David Pritchett
Syngenta
Annual Review 2010
  CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11

Switzerland
Investor Relations
T +41 61 323 5883
F +41 61 323 5880
E global.investor_relations@syngenta.com
Media Relations
T +41 61 323 2323
F +41 61 323 2424
E media.relations@syngenta.com
Share Register
T +41 58 399 6133
F +41 58 499 6193
E syngenta.aktienregister@sag.ch
Shareholder Services
T +41 61 323 9492
F +41 61 568 4146
E shareholder.services@syngenta.com
Ordering of publications
T +41 58 399 6133
E syngenta.aktienregister@sag.ch
Syngenta switchboard
T +41 61 323 1111
F +41 61 323 1212
E global.webmaster@syngenta.com
USA
Investor Relations
T +1 202 737 6520
T +1 202 737 6521
E global.investor_relations@syngenta.com
Media Relations
T +1 202 628 2372
F +1 202 347 8758
E media.relations_us@syngenta.com
Contacts for ADS holders
T +1 866 253 7068 – from within the USA T +1 201 680 6825 – from outside the USA
Syngenta International AG Corporate Affairs Schwarzwaldallee 215 P.O. Box
CH-4002 Basel Switzerland
www.syngenta.com
For the business year 2010, Syngenta has published three reports: Annual Review (incorporating the Corporate Responsibility Report), Financial Report and Corporate Governance and Compensation Report.
All documents were originally published in English. The Annual Review 2010 and the Corporate Governance and Compensation Report 2010 are also available in German.
These publications are also available on the Internet: www.syngenta.com
Syngenta International AG, Basel, Switzerland. All rights reserved.
Editorial completion: February 2011.
Design and production: Radley Yeldar, London, UK
Printing: NZZ Fretz AG, Zürich, Switzerland
Printed on Hello Silk, made with wood fiber from managed forests and manufactured at
a mill that has achieved the ISO14001 and EMAS environmental management standards.
® Registered trademarks of a Syngenta Group Company
TM Trademarks of a Syngenta Group Company
The SYNGENTA Wordmark, BRINGING PLANT POTENTIAL TO LIFE and the Purpose icon device are trademarks or registered trademarks of a Syngenta Group Company.
Cautionary statement regarding forward- looking statements: This document contains forward-looking statements, which can be identified by terminology such as “expect”, “would”, “will”, “potential”, “plans”, “prospects”, “estimated”, “aiming”, “on track” and similar expressions. Such statements may be subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause
the actual results to differ materially from these statements.
We refer you to Syngenta’s publicly available filings with the US Securities and Exchange Commission for information about these and other risks and uncertainties. Syngenta assumes no obligation to update forward- looking statements to reflect actual results, changed assumptions or other factors.
This document does not constitute, or form part of, any offer or invitation to sell or issue, or any solicitation of any offer, to purchase or subscribe for any ordinary shares in Syngenta AG, or Syngenta ADSs, nor shall it form the basis of, or be relied on in connection with, any contract therefor.
Article number 016841.040
      CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11
  
CorporateRegister.com Limited 29-03-11
